Title: Disentangling to Re-couple: Resolving the Similarity-Controllability Paradox in Subject-Driven Text-to-Image Generation

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2604.00849v1

Published Time: Thu, 02 Apr 2026 01:14:13 GMT

Number of Pages: 14

Markdown Content:
# Disentangling to Re-couple: Resolving the Similarity-Controllability Paradox in Subject-Driven Text-to-Image Generation 

## Shuang Li *, Chao Deng *, Hang Chen, Liqun Liu †

## ,Zhenyu Hu, Te Cao, Mengge Xue, Yuan Chen, Peng Shu, Huan Yu, Jie Jiang Tencent 

{shuangsali,kodideng,liqunliu }@tencent.com 

## Abstract 

Subject-Driven Text-to-Image (T2I) Generation aims to pre-serve a subject’s identity while editing its context based on a text prompt. A core challenge in this task is the “similarity-controllability paradox”, where enhancing tex-tual control often degrades the subject’s fidelity, and vice-versa. We argue this paradox stems from the ambiguous role of text prompts, which are often tasked with describing both the subject and the desired modifications, leading to conflicting signals for the model. To resolve this, we pro-pose DisCo , a novel framework that first Dis entangles and then re-Co uples visual and textual information. First, our textual-visual decoupling module isolates the sources of in-formation: subject identity is extracted exclusively from the reference image with the entity word of the subject, while the text prompt is simplified to contain only the modifi-cation command, where the subject refers to general pro-nouns, eliminating descriptive ambiguity. However, this strict separation can lead to unnatural compositions be-tween the subject and its contexts. We address this by de-signing a dedicated reward signal and using reinforcement learning to seamlessly recouple the visually-defined subject and the textually-generated context. Our approach effec-tively resolves the paradox, enabling simultaneous high-fidelity subject preservation and precise textual control. Ex-tensive experiments demonstrate that our method achieves state-of-the-art performance, producing highly realistic and coherent images. 

## 1. Introduction 

Subject-Driven Text-to-Image (T2I) Generation [7, 10, 29], also referred to as text-to-image customization, is defined as the task that takes both textual prompts and a given subject 

as input, and generates an image that aligns with the tex-              

> *These authors contributed equally to this work.
> †Corresponding author. this item with a city in
> the background
> acandle with a city in
> the background
> aduck toy in the jungle this item in the jungle

Figure 1. The results with different prompts of the same reference image generated by FLUX Kontext [dev]. 

tual prompts while preserving the subject’s precise details. Compared to general text-to-image generation, this task en-ables user-customized image modifications and maintains the subject’s fidelity and intellectual property (IP). It thus finds widespread applications in fields such as film produc-tion, advertising, and personalized recommendation sys-tems. Unlike standard T2I generation, which primarily fo-cuses on semantic adherence and image quality, the pri-mary challenge of subject-driven T2I generation lies in nav-igating a fundamental trade-off: maintaining high similar-ity to the reference subject while achieving precise con-trollability from the text prompt. This tension gives rise to a dual-optimum paradox between similarity (to the sub-ject) and controllability (by the prompt), where achieving optimal similarity to the given subject and optimal con-trollability via the text prompt cannot be optimized simul-taneously [12]. To address this issue, several encoder-based methods like IP-Adapter [49], RealCustom++ [22] and SSR-Encoder [51] employ an encoder to extract the fea-tures of the subject facilitated by masks or entity words, and 

> arXiv:2604.00849v1 [cs.CV] 1 Apr 2026

inject them into the model with a specialized cross-attention mechanism. Recently, methods such as OminiControl [36] and OminiGen [46] propose to integrate the subject image through a unified sequence with diffusion latents based on Diffusion Transformer (DiT) [26]. While these work have achieved superior performance, the dual-optimum paradox between similarity and control-lability remains a persistent bottleneck. We argue that the critical, yet overlooked, source of this paradox lies in the entanglement of roles between the text prompt and the ref-erence image during inference. Existing methods typically rely on prompts that describe both the subject and the de-sired modifications (e.g., “a duck toy in the jungle.” ). How-ever, textual descriptions of a subject are inherently discrete and abstract, failing to capture the rich, continuous infor-mation of color, texture, and style present for the subject. In this scenario, the model is also guided by the textual de-scription of the subject in the prompt, rather than simply relying on its visual features of the reference image. The entanglement creates a conflict: when the model prioritizes the prompt’s description of the subject, it often compro-mises the visual fidelity of the reference image. For example, Fig. 1 presents the results generated with different prompts of the same reference image. The duck toy shown in the first row has a meticulously designed beak. When using the prompt containing the phrase “a duck toy,” the model’s prior knowledge, acquired during training, overrides the reference image. This results in the gener-ation of a generic duck toy, whose beak shape and wing details differ from the original subject. However, when re-placing “a duck toy” with a non-descriptive generic pro-noun (e.g., “this item” or “it” ), the results maintain high similarity to the subject in the reference image. A similar behavior is observed with the candle sample in the second row. With the entity word “candle” , the model draws upon its prior knowledge and defaults to generating a lit candle. This demonstrates that the model’s failure in subject iden-tity preservation may stem not from its capabilities, but can be caused by inaccurate or overly specific subject descrip-tions in the prompt that introduce conflicting priors. We posit that for subject-driven T2I generation, subject identity should be derived exclusively from the reference image, while the text prompt should solely dictate the de-sired modifications . Therefore, we propose a novel textual-visual decoupling module. In this module, the prompt is strategically simplified to remove any descriptive informa-tion about the subject, instead using a general pronoun (e.g., 

“this item” or “it” ) to refer to the subject and focusing en-tirely on the modification instruction. Meanwhile, the sub-ject in the reference image is identified with the correspond-ing entity word (e.g., “a duck toy” ). The subject identity is injected directly and completely from the visual features of the reference image. However, this strict decoupling intro-duces another challenge: the subject, defined visually, and the context, defined textually, lack the necessary interaction, leading to unnatural compositions. As illustrated in the sec-ond example of Fig. 1, the original prompt generates a plau-sible scene where a candle is placed on an surface against a city landscape. However, once we decouple the textual and visual inputs, the model no longer receives contextual infor-mation about the subject from the prompt. Consequently, it struggles to determine how to compose “this item” within the scene described as “a city in the background.” While the subject fidelity is well maintained, the model defaults to the subject’s relative size and position from the reference image, erroneously placing the candle in mid-air. This leads to a physically implausible composition. To overcome the compositional gap, we leverage Group Relative Policy Optimization (GRPO) to enhance the cou-pling of textual and visual features. The successful adapta-tion of GRPO to T2I models by [18, 48] has already demon-strated significant gains in generation quality. However, ap-plying reinforcement learning to the specific task of subject-driven T2I generation introduces unique challenges. While existing reward metrics like ImageReward [47], CLIP-T [27], and HPS [44] are effective for general T2I, they pri-marily focus on overall image quality or text-image align-ment. The subject-driven task requires a more comprehen-sive reward signal. Specifically, an effective reward model must be able to assess not only text alignment but also sub-ject similarity, as well as the compositional harmony of the subject’s interaction with the context. To address this, we propose a novel strategy for training a discriminative reward model. We utilize a Vision Lan-guage Model (VLM) to automatically generate editing in-structions. These instructions are designed to synthetically create negative examples by modifying the target image’s subject ID features or its interaction with the context. By constructing preference pairs with original and edited im-ages, we train a reward model that becomes highly adept at distinguishing these precise failure modes. This new reward model provides a more robust and accurate signal, guiding the GRPO process. In summary, we propose DisCo , a novel Dis entangle and re-Co uple framework. DisCo first separates subject identity from textual control and then employs GRPO to re-couple them for natural and coherent subject-driven im-age generation. This resolves the similarity-controllability paradox, enabling the model to generate high-quality im-ages that maintain subject fidelity while precisely adhering to the prompt. Our main contributions are summarized as follows: • We identify the overloaded text prompt as a primary cause of the similarity-controllability paradox in customized image generation. We propose a novel textual-visual de-coupling module that isolates subject identity (sourced from the reference image) from contextual control (dic-tated by the prompt) to resolve this conflict. • We train a dedicated reward model for subject-driven gen-eration by automatically creating synthetic negative ex-amples. This reward supervises the GRPO process, sig-nificantly improving the compositional harmony and re-coupling the subject with its context. • Through extensive experiments, our method achieves state-of-the-art performance against existing approaches. Furthermore, we conducted detailed ablation studies to verify the effectiveness of the visual-textual decoupling module, the dedicated reward model and GRPO. 

## 2. Related Work 

2.1. Subject-driven Text-to-image Generation 

Early work [10, 23, 29] follow the pseudo-word paradigm by finetuning the pre-trained models for each subject in-dividually. These methods require extensive resources for tuning individual instances which renders them less feasible for widespread application. Some methods [16, 40, 41, 49] have sought to employ an encoder for subjects without additional fine-tuning. IP-Adapter [49] encodes subjects into text-compatible image prompts for subject personaliza-tion. MS-diffusion [40] introduces the layout-guided zero-shot image personalization with multiple subjects frame-work. RealCustom [12, 22] and SSR-Encoder [51] selec-tively inject subject-related features from images to reduce background features. While some works design dedicated attention mechanisms for subject-text interactions[17, 25, 39, 45], more recent study such as OminiControl [36, 37], UniReal [6], DreamO [24] and others [43, 46] explore the MM-Attention mechanism in DiTs [8] to incorporate image conditions with a unified sequence. Despite these advances, these works can not solve the dual-optimum paradox be-tween similarity and controllability .

2.2. Reinforcement Learning with Diffusion Models 

Reinforcement learning (RL), first popularized in Large Language Models (LLMs) [1, 11] using policy gradient methods like PPO [30] or value-free GRPO [32], has re-cently become a key research area for diffusion models. Current methods can be classified into three main cate-gories. The first is DPO-style optimization, which learns from preference data directly [38, 50]. The second is direct reward optimization, where gradients from a reward signal are backpropagated through the model, such as ReFL [47]. The third is policy gradient-based RL, which adapts classic RL algorithms like DDPO [4] and DPOK [9]. GRPO is a re-cent breakthrough that enhances LLMs on complex reason-ing tasks. Flow-GRPO[18] and DanceGRPO[48] have suc-cessfully introduced GRPO to flow-based models, demon-strating significant improvements in image generation qual-subject           

> Prompt: a colorful sneaker on a cobblestone street
> Prompt: this item on a cobblestone street
> output “entity word ”output →subject output →
> Figure 2. Visualization of the attention maps between entity word and subject to the generated image, respectively.

ity. In this paper, we adopt GRPO to re-couple visual and textual features. It enables the model to generate more real-istic images with harmonious integration between the sub-ject and background. 

## 3. Method 

This section introduces the architecture of our proposed method, DisCo, which is illustrated in Fig. 3. 

3.1. Preliminary 

The DiT model, employed in architectures like FLUX [14] and Stable Diffusion 3 [28], generates high-quality images through an iterative denoising process. In FLUX, at each denoising step, DiT blocks process a token sequence which consists of noisy image tokens X ∈ R∗× d and text con-dition tokens CT ∈ R∗× d, where d is the embedding di-mension and ∗ denotes the number of tokens. The previous work [36] extends the input sequence with image condition tokens for subject-driven T2I generation. For the reference image, it is first encoded into latent tokens CI ∈ R∗× d

using the VAE encoder. The extended token sequence be-comes: 

S = [ X; CT ; CI ] (1) Following the setup of FLUX Kontext , we employ a unified three-dimensional Rotary Position Embedding (3D RoPE) [34] within each DiT block. Image tokens are en-coded with the position (t, h, w ), where the virtual temporal index t distinguishes the noise latent from the reference im-age, and (h, w ) denote the spatial coordinates. Text condi-tion tokens are assigned a fixed position of (0 , 0, 0) to serve as a global condition. The multi-modal attention then projects position-encoded tokens into query Q, key K, and value V repre-sentations enabling attention computation across all tokens: FLUX    

> Prompt: a
> robot toy
> with a city in
> the
> background
> Prompt: this
> item with a
> city in the
> background

🔥  

> Textual -Visual Decoupling
> VLM
> Grounding
> Dino
> a robot toy

SDE Sampling 

> ...

𝑥 !

𝑥 "

𝑥 #   

> Sample 1
> ...
> Sample 2
> ...
> Sample N

## ... 

> Compute
> rewards

Reward Model 🔥       

> Train with
> preference pair
> Corrupt
> gt image
> gt image corrupted
> Denoising Steps

Figure 3. The architecture of our proposed DisCo framework. DisCo first decouples subject identity (from the image) from textual control (from the prompt). We generate corrupted images to construct preference pairs with the ground truth images to train the Reward Model. Subsequently, it employs GRPO to re-couple textual and visual features, generating a coherent image that preserves subject details while adhering to the prompt. 

MMA ([ X; CT ; CI ]) = softmax 

 QK ⊤

√d



V,  (2) where [X; CT ; CI ] denotes the concatenation of image, text and reference image tokens. 

3.2. Textual-visual Decoupling Module 

As mentioned in Introduction, the similarity-controllability paradox is a critical bottleneck in subject-driven T2I gen-eration. We argue that its primary cause is the textual de-scriptions of the subject entangle with modification instruc-tions, activating the model’s strong preconceived biases and compromising visual fidelity. To resolve this, we propose a textual-visual decoupling module guided by a core princi-ple: subject identity should be derived exclusively from the reference image, while the text prompt should solely dictate the desired modifications .This module implements the principle through a system-atic, two-part process, illustrated in Fig. 3. Given an input prompt ( cT ) and a reference image ( cI ), the process begins as follows: 

Prompt Simplification. First, we must identify the source of the conflicting textual signal. We employ a pow-erful Vision-Language Model (Qwen2.5-VL 72B [3], to an-alyze the prompt in the context of the image and identify the subject. We term this the “ entity word ” (e.g., “a duck toy”). This entity word is precisely what triggers the model’s in-ternal, often generic, priors, as seen with the duck’s beak and the candle’s flame in Fig. 1. Therefore, we strategi-cally simplify the prompt by replacing the entity word and its related descriptions with a generic placeholder, such as “this item ” or “ it ”. The resulting prompt (e.g., “ this item in the jungle ”) forces the model to seek identity information exclusively from the visual modality, effectively silencing the conflicting textual guidance. 

Visual Grounding. Simplifying the prompt, however, creates ambiguity: the model no longer knows which ob-ject in the reference image “ this item ” refers to. To resolve this, we leverage GroundingDINO [19] to explicitly localize the subject in the reference image ci. Crucially, we provide GroundingDINO with the original entity word identified in the previous step. This allows for precise localization of the intended subject without altering the reference image itself. This process effectively bridges the generic pronoun in the decoupled prompt with the specific, high-fidelity visual fea-tures of the subject in the reference image, ensuring precise identity preservation. 

Analysis of Attention Maps. To empirically validate how this module alters the interaction between latents, text and reference image, we visualize the cross-attention maps from DiT block in Fig. 2. For each row, we compute the atten-tion from the conditions (the entity word from the original prompt and the grounded subject from the image) to the generated image. The top row, representing the baseline with entangled signals, reveals that the entity word (“a col-orful sneaker”) casts a strong attentional focus on the sub-ject, confirming its undesirable influence. In contrast, after applying our decoupling module in the bottom row, the at-tention from the now-absent entity word is suppressed. In-stead, the attention map originating from the grounded ref-erence subject now precisely and strongly targets the corre-sponding area in the generated image. This provides direct evidence that our method successfully shifts the locus of control for identity from the overloaded text prompt to the high-fidelity visual reference, leading to a well-preserved subject. 

3.3. Textual-Visual Re-Coupling 

Following the textual-visual decoupling, a significant chal-lenge remains: the compositional gap . The model, having learned to treat the subject’s identity and the background context as separate entities, may struggle to merge them into a single, coherent image. To address this gap, we introduce Group Relative Policy Optimization (GRPO) as a second stage and design a reward model that co-evolves with the image generation model. While existing reward models such as ImageReward, HPSv2, and CLIP-based scorers primarily focus on assess-ing overall image quality, subject-driven T2I generation re-quires a richer notion of reward. In particular, the model must simultaneously evaluate (i) subject similariity between the generated image and the reference image, and (ii) com-positional integration between the subject and context. To this end, we train a specialized reward model based on Qwen3-VL-30B, tailored for this task. We construct the preference data using synthetically generated negative ex-amples. We utilize a VLM to produce editing instructions that intentionally modify either the subject identity features or the interaction between the subject and the surrounding context. Applying these instructions yields edited images that exhibit controlled deviations from the desired subject appearance or compositional fidelity. Given a reference im-age, the VLM produces an editing instruction, which is ap-plied to obtain an edited image. For each original-edited pair, The model is trained to assign higher preference to the original image, which preserves the target subject iden-tity and composition. Additional implementation details are provided in the Appendix. In GRPO stage, for the given pair c of a prompt cT and a reference image cI , we first sample a group of G images 

{xi

> 0

}Gi=1 , and construct pairwise comparisons. Each image pair, together with the reference image, is fed into the re-ward model, which selects the preferred image. We sum the log-probabilities associated with the tokens that support its selection and this aggregated value serves as the final re-ward for that image. The advantage ˆAit for the i-th image within each group is then calculated by normalizing its final reward against the mean and standard deviation of the entire group’s rewards: 

ˆAit = R(xi

> 0

, c ) − mean ({R(xi

> 0

, c )}Gi=1 )

std ({R(xi

> 0

, c )}Gi=1 ) . (3) With the advantage defined, GRPO optimizes the policy model by maximizing the following objective function: 

JGRPO (θ) = Ec∼C, {xi}Gi=1 ∼πθold (·| c)f (r, ˆA, θ, ε, β ), (4) where            

> f(·) = 1
> G
> GX
> i=1
> 1
> T
> T−1X
> t=0
> 
> min
> 
> rit(θ) ˆAit,clip  rit(θ),1−ε, 1 + εˆAit
> 
> −βDKL
>  πθ∥πref
> 
> ,

(5) 

rit(θ) = pθ (xit−1|xit, c )

pθold (xit−1|xit, c ) . (6) 

## 4. Experiments 

4.1. Experimental Setups 

Implementation Details. We adopt FLUX [14] as the base model and train on Subjects200K dataset proposed by Tan et al. [36]. For the training process, we employ the AdamW [20] optimizer with a learning rate of 1e-5 and train on 8 NVIDIA H20 80G GPUs. The batch size is set to 2 and the gradient accumulation step is set to 12. In the settings of GRPO, the sampling timestep is set to 16 and the numbers of generation image per prompt is set to 12. The noise level 

ϵ is set to 0.3. We adopt Qwen3-VL-30B [2] as the reward model, trained with 25k preference pairs constructed from original and edited images generated by FLUX. We will re-lease both the dataset used for training and the code of our method. Additional training details of the reward model can be found in the Appendix. 

Baselines. We compare our method with following methods: (1) SDXL-based methods: IP-Adapter [49], Emu2 [35], SSR-Encoder [51], MS-Diffusion [40] and Re-alCustom++ [22]; (2) FLUX-based methods: OminiCon-trol [36], ACE++ [21], UNO [43], DreamO [24], and FLUX 

Kontext [dev] [15]. For a fair comparison, we evaluate all baseline models by running their official open-source code on the benchmark, using the default hyper-parameter set-tings as specified in the respective papers. 

Evaluation Metrics. We conduct experiments on Dream-Bench [29]. The benchmark includes 30 subjects with 25 editing prompts each, leading to 750 evaluation cases. Sub-ject similarity is measured by CLIP-I and DINO [5] scores. Following RealCustom++, we use SAM [13] to segment Subject ACE++ DreamO OminiControl UNO FLUX Kontext DisCo Prompt       

> a wet
> candle
> adog in a
> firefighter
> outfit
> aclock with
> the Eiffel
> Tower in
> the
> background
> aberry
> bowl in the
> jungle
> a shiny
> cartoon Figure 4. Qualitative comparison with baseline methods on DreamBench.

the main subject from both the reference and generated im-ages before computing the similarity scores. Text control-lability is evaluated by the text-image embedding similarity with CLIP [27]. For CLIP-based metrics, we use two CLIP model variants: ViT-B/32 and ViT-L/14, denoted as CLIP-B-* and CLIP-L-*, respectively. We also adopt ImageRe-ward [47] as an overall metric for Image quality .

4.2. Main Results 

Quantitative Results. As presented in Tab. 1, our pro-posed method, DisCo, demonstrates superior performance over both SDXL-based and FLUX-based baselines across all evaluation metrics. For subject similarity, DisCo achieves state-of-the-art results. It obtains the highest scores for all of CLIP-B-I (0.928), CLIP-L-I (0.937) and DINO-I (0.903). These results empirically validate our ap-proach of decoupling textual and visual conditions, which encourages the model to source subject-related features pri-marily from the reference image. Notably, DisCo also ex-cels in text controllability, a metric that often presents a trade-off with subject similarity. This tension is evident in prior work; for instance, the results for SSR-Encoder vs. MS-Diffusion and DreamO vs. UNO show that improving one metric can lead to the degradation of the other. In con-trast, our method effectively mitigates this trade-off, achiev-ing the highest scores for both subject similarity and text controllability simultaneously. Finally, DisCo maintains plausible image quality while resolving the core simliarity-controllability paradox. It achieves an IR score 1.339, out-performing the next-best competitor, FLUX Kontext .

Qualitative Results. Figure 4 provides a qualitative com-parison of DisCo against FLUX-based methods. Flux Kon-text excels other baselines in terms of subject similarity, but this model has drawbacks. It often copies the reference sub-ject into a new scene with minimal integration, leading to unnatural results as seen in the dog and clock cases. More-over, because its prompt contains entangled descriptive in-formation, it can also exhibit poor subject fidelity in certain scenarios such as the berry bowl. OminiControl and ACE++ frequently fail to preserve the subject’s identity, altering key attributes like the dog’s breed and the cartoon monster’s color. DreamO and UNO show improved subject similar-ity but suffer from limited text controllability. For instance, UNO completely ignores the prompt “in a firefighter outfit” for the dog example. Among all methods, DisCo achieves a Table 1. Quantitative comparison of DisCo and baselines on DreamBench. Bold and underline represent the highest and second-highest metrics, respectively. 

Method Subject Similarity Text Controllability Image Quality CLIP-B-I ↑ CLIP-L-I ↑ DINO-I ↑ CLIP-B-T ↑ CLIP-L-T ↑ ImageReward ↑

IP-Adapter 0.839 0.823 0.684 0.311 0.233 0.463 Emu2 0.833 0.813 0.719 0.291 0.235 -0.148 SSR-Encoder 0.832 0.804 0.730 0.302 0.251 0.139 MS-Diffusion 0.814 0.795 0.727 0.312 0.259 1.098 RealCustom++ 0.801 0.772 0.749 0.315 0.258 1.251 OminiControl 0.857 0.867 0.713 0.320 0.263 1.254 ACE++ 0.876 0.881 0.734 0.321 0.267 1.150 DreamO 0.899 0.901 0.813 0.322 0.267 1.186 UNO 0.899 0.907 0.827 0.311 0.255 0.854 FLUX.1 Kontext [dev] 0.910 0.911 0.839 0.321 0.268 1.276 

DisCo (ours) 0.928 0.937 0.903 0.329 0.273 1.339 

superior balance of subject consistency, text controllability, and overall image quality. Furthermore, DisCo’s advantages become even more pronounced in complex scenarios. When compared against the best baseline, FLUX Kontext , Fig. 5 illustrates that our method accurately identifies and preserves the subject’s vi-sual features while integrating them into the new context. Subject DisCo Prompt 

> An elegant historical library with a rich, ornate rug lying beneath towering bookshelves, illuminated by soft light from stained-glass windows
> Kontext
> A minimalist bathroom with a tall shelving unit holding neatly arranged toiletries and rolled towels, illuminated by soft, diffused light from a frosted glass window.
> A woman stands at the shoreline during a golden hour sunset, wearing a detailed crochet crop top as waves gently lap her feet and a sailboat rests on the horizon.
> A captain's bed with storage drawers sits against an exposed brick wall in an urban loft, illuminated by warm pendant lighting, with a cityscape visible through large windows at twilight.

Figure 5. Qualitative results on complex scenarios. 

User Study. To validate the effectiveness of our method, we conducted a large-scale human evaluation, comparing DisCo against five leading methods via a pairwise, side-by-side study on 100 samples. Participants were asked to choose the better image or declare a tie based on over-all quality, subject similarity and text controllability. As shown in Fig. 6, DisCo consistently outperforms all base-lines. It achieves overwhelming win rates against UNO (80%) and DreamO (82%) and maintains a clear advan-tage over OminiControl (71%) and ACE++ (66%). No-tably, even against FLUX Kontext , DisCo is preferred in the majority of cases (51% win rate; 24% lose rate). This human-centric evaluation confirms that DisCo produces sig-nificantly more appealing and accurate results than existing models. 

Figure 6. Pairwise human evaluation on 100 cases. Subject DisCo w/o TVD w/o GRPO use IR (r) use CLIP (r) use pretrained (r) 

> Prompt: a teapot floating in an ocean of milk Prompt: a cube shaped backpack

Figure 7. Comparison of image generation results by using different model settings. 

4.3. Ablation Study 

As shown in Tab. 2, we conduct a comprehensive ablation study to validate the effectiveness of the key components in DisCo. Figure 7 illustrates several cases from results. We first evaluate the effect of textual-visual decoupling module by removing it (“w/o TVD”). In this setting, the model is trained on the original text prompt and subject. The results show a noticeable drop in both CLIP-I and CLIP-T scores compared to our full model. In Fig. 7, the results show that without decoupling, the model struggles to simultane-ously preserve the subject’s identity and follow the prompt. Then we analyze the contribution of the GRPO stage by re-moving it and only using the output of the TVD module (“w/o GRPO”) to inference. This configuration yields the second-highest subject fidelity score (CLIP-I: 0.922) and the lowest prompt adherence score (CLIP-T: 0.319), as the model strictly sources the subject’s identity from the refer-ence image without contextual control. Moreover, as shown in Tab. 2 and Fig. 7, this comes at a significant cost to im-age quality, with IR (1.189) score dropping sharply. This demonstrates that GRPO is essential for re-coupling the de-coupled visual and textual features, thereby enhancing the overall quality and realism of the generated images. We investigate the impact of different reward models within the GRPO stage by comparing our approach with several alternatives. As shown in Tab. 2, we first evaluate reward models adotped in text-to-image generation: CLIP (ViT-B/32) and ImageReward (IR), denoted as w/ CLIP (r) and w/ IR (r). Using CLIP as the reward model degrades overall performance, which we attribute to its inability to as-sess fine-grained qualities like compositional harmony and physical plausibility, both critical for our task. While Im-ageReward yields a slight improvement in image quality, it comes at the cost of a significant drop in subject simi-larity. This result highlights the necessity of incorporating reference images into reward modeling for subject-driven generation. We then evaluate using a pretrained VLM di-rectly as the reward model (w/ pretrained (r)). Although this improves subject similarity slightly compared to CLIP and IR, it leads to worse text adherence and image quality, demonstrating the difficulty in calibrating a general-purpose pretrained model to the complicated preference criteria in subject-driven generation. 

Table 2. Ablation study of DisCo on DreamBench. TVD repre-sents Textual-visual Decoupling Module. 

Method CLIP-I ↑ CLIP-T ↑ IR ↑

w/o TVD 0.915 0.319 1.237 w/o GRPO 0.922 0.319 1.189 use CLIP (r) 0.898 0.319 1.163 use IR (r) 0.914 0.326 1.404 

use pretrained (r) 0.918 0.321 1.189 

DisCo (Ours) 0.928 0.329 1.339 

## 5. Conclusion 

In this paper, we addressed the fundamental similarity-controllability paradox that hinders progress in subject-driven text-to-image generation. We identified the root cause of this issue as the entanglement of roles within overloaded text prompts, where descriptions of the subject conflict with the visual information from the reference image. To resolve this, we proposed DisCo , a novel 

Dis entangle and re-Co uple framework. Our approach first employs a textual-visual decoupling module to isolate subject identity, sourcing it exclusively from the reference image, while the simplified text prompt dic-tates only the desired modifications. Subsequently, we introduce Group Relative Policy Optimization (GRPO) to intelligently re-couple the subject and background, overcoming the compositional gap. Extensive experi-ments demonstrate that DisCo achieves state-of-the-art performance, significantly outperforming existing meth-ods in subject similarity while precisely adhering to prompt. References 

[1] Josh Achiam, Steven Adler, Sandhini Agarwal, Lama Ah-mad, Ilge Akkaya, Florencia Leoni Aleman, Diogo Almeida, Janko Altenschmidt, Sam Altman, Shyamal Anadkat, et al. Gpt-4 technical report. arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.08774 ,2023. 3 [2] Shuai Bai, Yuxuan Cai, Ruizhe Chen, Keqin Chen, Xionghui Chen, Zesen Cheng, Lianghao Deng, Wei Ding, Chang Gao, Chunjiang Ge, Wenbin Ge, Zhifang Guo, Qidong Huang, Jie Huang, Fei Huang, Binyuan Hui, Shutong Jiang, Zhao-hai Li, Mingsheng Li, Mei Li, Kaixin Li, Zicheng Lin, Jun-yang Lin, Xuejing Liu, Jiawei Liu, Chenglong Liu, Yang Liu, Dayiheng Liu, Shixuan Liu, Dunjie Lu, Ruilin Luo, Chenxu Lv, Rui Men, Lingchen Meng, Xuancheng Ren, Xingzhang Ren, Sibo Song, Yuchong Sun, Jun Tang, Jianhong Tu, Jian-qiang Wan, Peng Wang, Pengfei Wang, Qiuyue Wang, Yux-uan Wang, Tianbao Xie, Yiheng Xu, Haiyang Xu, Jin Xu, Zhibo Yang, Mingkun Yang, Jianxin Yang, An Yang, Bowen Yu, Fei Zhang, Hang Zhang, Xi Zhang, Bo Zheng, Humen Zhong, Jingren Zhou, Fan Zhou, Jing Zhou, Yuanzhi Zhu, and Ke Zhu. Qwen3-vl technical report, 2025. 5 [3] Shuai Bai, Keqin Chen, Xuejing Liu, Jialin Wang, Wenbin Ge, Sibo Song, Kai Dang, Peng Wang, Shijie Wang, Jun Tang, Humen Zhong, Yuanzhi Zhu, Mingkun Yang, Zhao-hai Li, Jianqiang Wan, Pengfei Wang, Wei Ding, Zheren Fu, Yiheng Xu, Jiabo Ye, Xi Zhang, Tianbao Xie, Zesen Cheng, Hang Zhang, Zhibo Yang, Haiyang Xu, and Junyang Lin. Qwen2.5-vl technical report, 2025. 4 [4] Kevin Black, Michael Janner, Yilun Du, Ilya Kostrikov, and Sergey Levine. Training diffusion models with reinforce-ment learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.13301 , 2023. 3 [5] Mathilde Caron, Hugo Touvron, Ishan Misra, Herv´ e J´ egou, Julien Mairal, Piotr Bojanowski, and Armand Joulin. Emerg-ing properties in self-supervised vision transformers, 2021. 5 [6] Xi Chen, Zhifei Zhang, He Zhang, Yuqian Zhou, Soo Ye Kim, Qing Liu, Yijun Li, Jianming Zhang, Nanxuan Zhao, Yilin Wang, et al. Unireal: Universal image generation and editing via learning real-world dynamics. In Proceedings of the Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition Conference ,pages 12501–12511, 2025. 3 [7] Florinel-Alin Croitoru, Vlad Hondru, Radu Tudor Ionescu, and Mubarak Shah. Diffusion models in vision: A survey. 

IEEE Transactions on Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelli-gence , 45(9):10850–10869, 2023. 1 [8] Patrick Esser, Sumith Kulal, Andreas Blattmann, Rahim Entezari, Jonas M¨ uller, Harry Saini, Yam Levi, Dominik Lorenz, Axel Sauer, Frederic Boesel, et al. Scaling recti-fied flow transformers for high-resolution image synthesis. In Forty-first international conference on machine learning ,2024. 3 [9] Ying Fan, Olivia Watkins, Yuqing Du, Hao Liu, Moonkyung Ryu, Craig Boutilier, Pieter Abbeel, Moham-mad Ghavamzadeh, Kangwook Lee, and Kimin Lee. Dpok: Reinforcement learning for fine-tuning text-to-image diffu-sion models. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , 36:79858–79885, 2023. 3 [10] Rinon Gal, Yuval Alaluf, Yuval Atzmon, Or Patash-nik, Amit H Bermano, Gal Chechik, and Daniel Cohen-Or. An image is worth one word: Personalizing text-to-image generation using textual inversion. arXiv preprint arXiv:2208.01618 , 2022. 1, 3 [11] Daya Guo, Dejian Yang, Haowei Zhang, Junxiao Song, Ruoyu Zhang, Runxin Xu, Qihao Zhu, Shirong Ma, Peiyi Wang, Xiao Bi, et al. Deepseek-r1: Incentivizing reasoning capability in llms via reinforcement learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2501.12948 , 2025. 3 [12] Mengqi Huang, Zhendong Mao, Mingcong Liu, Qian He, and Yongdong Zhang. Realcustom: narrowing real text word for real-time open-domain text-to-image customization. In 

Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vi-sion and Pattern Recognition , pages 7476–7485, 2024. 1, 3[13] Alexander Kirillov, Eric Mintun, Nikhila Ravi, Hanzi Mao, Chloe Rolland, Laura Gustafson, Tete Xiao, Spencer White-head, Alexander C. Berg, Wan-Yen Lo, Piotr Doll´ ar, and Ross Girshick. Segment anything, 2023. 5 [14] Black Forest Labs. Flux. https://github.com/ black-forest-labs/flux , 2024. 3, 5 [15] Black Forest Labs, Stephen Batifol, Andreas Blattmann, Frederic Boesel, Saksham Consul, Cyril Diagne, Tim Dock-horn, Jack English, Zion English, Patrick Esser, Sumith Ku-lal, Kyle Lacey, Yam Levi, Cheng Li, Dominik Lorenz, Jonas M¨ uller, Dustin Podell, Robin Rombach, Harry Saini, Axel Sauer, and Luke Smith. Flux.1 kontext: Flow matching for in-context image generation and editing in latent space, 2025. 5 [16] Dongxu Li, Junnan Li, and Steven Hoi. Blip-diffusion: Pre-trained subject representation for controllable text-to-image generation and editing. Advances in Neural Information Pro-cessing Systems , 36:30146–30166, 2023. 3 [17] Zhen Li, Mingdeng Cao, Xintao Wang, Zhongang Qi, Ming-Ming Cheng, and Ying Shan. PhotoMaker: Customizing Realistic Human Photos via Stacked ID Embedding . In 

2024 IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pat-tern Recognition (CVPR) , pages 8640–8650, Los Alamitos, CA, USA, 2024. IEEE Computer Society. 3 [18] Jie Liu, Gongye Liu, Jiajun Liang, Yangguang Li, Jiaheng Liu, Xintao Wang, Pengfei Wan, Di Zhang, and Wanli Ouyang. Flow-grpo: Training flow matching models via on-line rl. arXiv preprint arXiv:2505.05470 , 2025. 2, 3 [19] Shilong Liu, Zhaoyang Zeng, Tianhe Ren, Feng Li, Hao Zhang, Jie Yang, Qing Jiang, Chunyuan Li, Jianwei Yang, Hang Su, et al. Grounding dino: Marrying dino with grounded pre-training for open-set object detection. In Euro-pean conference on computer vision , pages 38–55. Springer, 2024. 4 [20] Ilya Loshchilov and Frank Hutter. Decoupled weight decay regularization. arXiv preprint arXiv:1711.05101 , 2017. 5 [21] Chaojie Mao, Jingfeng Zhang, Yulin Pan, Zeyinzi Jiang, Zhen Han, Yu Liu, and Jingren Zhou. Ace++: Instruction-based image creation and editing via context-aware content filling. arXiv preprint arXiv:2501.02487 , 2025. 5 [22] Zhendong Mao, Mengqi Huang, Fei Ding, Mingcong Liu, Qian He, and Yongdong Zhang. Realcustom++: Represent-ing images as real-word for real-time customization. arXiv preprint arXiv:2408.09744 , 2024. 1, 3, 5 [23] Yanting Miao, William Loh, Suraj Kothawade, Pascal Poupart, Abdullah Rashwan, and Yeqing Li. Subject-driven text-to-image generation via preference-based reinforcement learning. In Proceedings of the 38th International Confer-ence on Neural Information Processing Systems , Red Hook, NY, USA, 2024. Curran Associates Inc. 3, 1 [24] Chong Mou, Yanze Wu, Wenxu Wu, Zinan Guo, Pengze Zhang, Yufeng Cheng, Yiming Luo, Fei Ding, Shiwen Zhang, Xinghui Li, Mengtian Li, Mingcong Liu, Yi Zhang, Shaojin Wu, Songtao Zhao, Jian Zhang, Qian He, and Xin-glong Wu. Dreamo: A unified framework for image cus-tomization, 2025. 3, 5 [25] Or Patashnik, Rinon Gal, Daniil Ostashev, Sergey Tulyakov, Kfir Aberman, and Daniel Cohen-Or. Nested attention: Semantic-aware attention values for concept personalization. In Proceedings of the Special Interest Group on Computer Graphics and Interactive Techniques Conference Conference Papers , New York, NY, USA, 2025. Association for Comput-ing Machinery. 3 [26] William Peebles and Saining Xie. Scalable diffusion models with transformers. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF inter-national conference on computer vision , pages 4195–4205, 2023. 2 [27] Alec Radford, Jong Wook Kim, Chris Hallacy, Aditya Ramesh, Gabriel Goh, Sandhini Agarwal, Girish Sastry, Amanda Askell, Pamela Mishkin, Jack Clark, et al. Learning transferable visual models from natural language supervi-sion. In International conference on machine learning , pages 8748–8763. PmLR, 2021. 2, 6 [28] Robin Rombach, Andreas Blattmann, Dominik Lorenz, Patrick Esser, and Bj¨ orn Ommer. High-resolution image synthesis with latent diffusion models. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF conference on computer vision and pattern recognition , pages 10684–10695, 2022. 3 [29] Nataniel Ruiz, Yuanzhen Li, Varun Jampani, Yael Pritch, Michael Rubinstein, and Kfir Aberman. Dreambooth: Fine tuning text-to-image diffusion models for subject-driven generation. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF conference on computer vision and pattern recognition , pages 22500– 22510, 2023. 1, 3, 5 [30] John Schulman, Filip Wolski, Prafulla Dhariwal, Alec Rad-ford, and Oleg Klimov. Proximal policy optimization algo-rithms. arXiv preprint arXiv:1707.06347 , 2017. 3 [31] Team Seedream, :, Yunpeng Chen, Yu Gao, Lixue Gong, Meng Guo, Qiushan Guo, Zhiyao Guo, Xiaoxia Hou, Weilin Huang, Yixuan Huang, Xiaowen Jian, Huafeng Kuang, Zhichao Lai, Fanshi Li, Liang Li, Xiaochen Lian, Chao Liao, Liyang Liu, Wei Liu, Yanzuo Lu, Zhengxiong Luo, Tong-tong Ou, Guang Shi, Yichun Shi, Shiqi Sun, Yu Tian, Zhi Tian, Peng Wang, Rui Wang, Xun Wang, Ye Wang, Guofeng Wu, Jie Wu, Wenxu Wu, Yonghui Wu, Xin Xia, Xuefeng Xiao, Shuang Xu, Xin Yan, Ceyuan Yang, Jianchao Yang, Zhonghua Zhai, Chenlin Zhang, Heng Zhang, Qi Zhang, Xinyu Zhang, Yuwei Zhang, Shijia Zhao, Wenliang Zhao, and Wenjia Zhu. Seedream 4.0: Toward next-generation multimodal image generation, 2025. 1 [32] Zhihong Shao, Peiyi Wang, Qihao Zhu, Runxin Xu, Junxiao Song, Xiao Bi, Haowei Zhang, Mingchuan Zhang, YK Li, Yang Wu, et al. Deepseekmath: Pushing the limits of math-ematical reasoning in open language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2402.03300 , 2024. 3 [33] Chaehun Shin, Jooyoung Choi, Heeseung Kim, and Sun-groh Yoon. Large-scale text-to-image model with inpaint-ing is a zero-shot subject-driven image generator. In 2025 IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR) , pages 7986–7996, 2025. 1 [34] Jianlin Su, Murtadha Ahmed, Yu Lu, Shengfeng Pan, Wen Bo, and Yunfeng Liu. Roformer: Enhanced transformer with rotary position embedding. Neurocomputing , 568:127063, 2024. 3 [35] Quan Sun, Yufeng Cui, Xiaosong Zhang, Fan Zhang, Qiying Yu, Zhengxiong Luo, Yueze Wang, Yongming Rao, Jingjing Liu, Tiejun Huang, and Xinlong Wang. Generative multi-modal models are in-context learners, 2023. 5 [36] Zhenxiong Tan, Songhua Liu, Xingyi Yang, Qiaochu Xue, and Xinchao Wang. Ominicontrol: Minimal and uni-versal control for diffusion transformer. arXiv preprint arXiv:2411.15098 , 2024. 2, 3, 5 [37] Zhenxiong Tan, Qiaochu Xue, Xingyi Yang, Songhua Liu, and Xinchao Wang. Ominicontrol2: Efficient conditioning for diffusion transformers. arXiv preprint arXiv:2503.08280 ,2025. 3 [38] Bram Wallace, Meihua Dang, Rafael Rafailov, Linqi Zhou, Aaron Lou, Senthil Purushwalkam, Stefano Ermon, Caiming Xiong, Shafiq Joty, and Nikhil Naik. Diffusion model align-ment using direct preference optimization. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition , pages 8228–8238, 2024. 3 [39] Kuan-Chieh Wang, Daniil Ostashev, Yuwei Fang, Sergey Tulyakov, and Kfir Aberman. Moa: Mixture-of-attention for subject-context disentanglement in personalized image gen-eration. In SIGGRAPH Asia 2024 Conference Papers , New York, NY, USA, 2024. Association for Computing Machin-ery. 3 [40] Xierui Wang, Siming Fu, Qihan Huang, Wanggui He, and Hao Jiang. Ms-diffusion: Multi-subject zero-shot image per-sonalization with layout guidance. In The Thirteenth Inter-national Conference on Learning Representations , 2024. 3, 5[41] Yuxiang Wei, Yabo Zhang, Zhilong Ji, Jinfeng Bai, Lei Zhang, and Wangmeng Zuo. Elite: Encoding visual con-cepts into textual embeddings for customized text-to-image generation. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer Vision , pages 15943–15953, 2023. 3[42] Chenfei Wu, Jiahao Li, Jingren Zhou, Junyang Lin, Kaiyuan Gao, Kun Yan, Sheng ming Yin, Shuai Bai, Xiao Xu, Yilei Chen, Yuxiang Chen, Zecheng Tang, Zekai Zhang, Zhengyi Wang, An Yang, Bowen Yu, Chen Cheng, Dayiheng Liu, De-qing Li, Hang Zhang, Hao Meng, Hu Wei, Jingyuan Ni, Kai Chen, Kuan Cao, Liang Peng, Lin Qu, Minggang Wu, Peng Wang, Shuting Yu, Tingkun Wen, Wensen Feng, Xiaoxiao Xu, Yi Wang, Yichang Zhang, Yongqiang Zhu, Yujia Wu, Yuxuan Cai, and Zenan Liu. Qwen-image technical report, 2025. 1 [43] Shaojin Wu, Mengqi Huang, Wenxu Wu, Yufeng Cheng, Fei Ding, and Qian He. Less-to-more generalization: Unlocking more controllability by in-context generation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2504.02160 , 2025. 3, 5 [44] Xiaoshi Wu, Keqiang Sun, Feng Zhu, Rui Zhao, and Hong-sheng Li. Human preference score: Better aligning text-to-image models with human preference. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer Vi-sion , pages 2096–2105, 2023. 2 [45] Guangxuan Xiao, Tianwei Yin, William T. Freeman, Fr´ edo Durand, and Song Han. Fastcomposer: Tuning-free multi-subject image generation with localized attention. Int. J. Comput. Vision , 133(3):1175–1194, 2024. 3 [46] Shitao Xiao, Yueze Wang, Junjie Zhou, Huaying Yuan, Xin-grun Xing, Ruiran Yan, Chaofan Li, Shuting Wang, Tiejun Huang, and Zheng Liu. Omnigen: Unified image genera-tion. In Proceedings of the Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition Conference , pages 13294–13304, 2025. 2, 3 [47] Jiazheng Xu, Xiao Liu, Yuchen Wu, Yuxuan Tong, Qinkai Li, Ming Ding, Jie Tang, and Yuxiao Dong. Imagere-ward: Learning and evaluating human preferences for text-to-image generation. Advances in Neural Information Pro-cessing Systems , 36:15903–15935, 2023. 2, 3, 6 [48] Zeyue Xue, Jie Wu, Yu Gao, Fangyuan Kong, Lingting Zhu, Mengzhao Chen, Zhiheng Liu, Wei Liu, Qiushan Guo, Weilin Huang, et al. Dancegrpo: Unleashing grpo on visual generation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2505.07818 , 2025. 2, 3 [49] Hu Ye, Jun Zhang, Sibo Liu, Xiao Han, and Wei Yang. Ip-adapter: Text compatible image prompt adapter for text-to-image diffusion models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2308.06721 ,2023. 1, 3, 5 [50] Tao Zhang, Cheng Da, Kun Ding, Huan Yang, Kun Jin, Yan Li, Tingting Gao, Di Zhang, Shiming Xiang, and Chun-hong Pan. Diffusion model as a noise-aware latent reward model for step-level preference optimization. arXiv preprint arXiv:2502.01051 , 2025. 3 [51] Yuxuan Zhang, Yiren Song, Jiaming Liu, Rui Wang, Jinpeng Yu, Hao Tang, Huaxia Li, Xu Tang, Yao Hu, Han Pan, et al. Ssr-encoder: Encoding selective subject representation for subject-driven generation. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition ,pages 8069–8078, 2024. 1, 3, 5 Disentangling to Re-couple: Resolving the Similarity-Controllability Paradox in Subject-Driven Text-to-Image Generation 

# Supplementary Material 

## 6. More Baselines and Benchmark Results 

In Tab. 3, we compared againt DiptychPrompting[33] and RPO[23]. While RPO achieves high CLIP-T scores, it requires extensive per-instance tuning, making it signifi-cantly less feasible for large-scale applications than our ap-proach. Regarding IC-LoRA, its implementation requires task-specific comfyui workflows; we aim to include these results in the final version. Table 4 shows results on Dream-Bench++. DisCo still outperforms major baselines in sub-ject consistency and prompt adherence across a wider range of subjects. 

Table 3. Quantitative results on DreamBench.                                     

> Method CLIP-B-I ↑DINO-I ↑CLIP-B-T ↑ImageReward ↑
> DreamO 0.899 0.813 0.322 1.186 DreamO-decouple 0.871 0.771 0.312 0.661 UNO 0.899 0.827 0.311 0.854 UNO-decouple 0.891 0.828 0.303 0.359 Diptych Prompting 0.864 0.767 0.319 1.136 RPO 0.852 0.725 0.338 1.164 DisCo (ours) 0.928 0.903 0.329 1.339

Table 4. Quantitative results on DreamBench++.                                 

> Method CLIP-B-I ↑DINO-I ↑CLIP-B-T ↑ImageReward ↑
> OminiControl 0.757 0.538 0.335 1.173 ACE++ 0.787 0.552 0.324 0.762 DreamO 0.795 0.589 0.336 1.044 UNO 0.782 0.549 0.321 0.693 FLUX.1 Kontext [dev] 0.790 0.572 0.334 1.118 DisCo (ours) 0.801 0.610 0.339 1.291

## 7. Qualitative Results with General Text-to-image Models 

Figure 8 provides a qualitative comparison of DisCo against several leading general image editing models: Nano Ba-nana, Qwen-Image-Edit[42], and Seedream 4.0[31]. Our method achieves a superior balance of subject similarity and text controllability, showing performance that is compara-ble to or even surpasses these state-of-the-art methods. However, other baselines exhibit specific drawbacks. Nano Banana occasionally compromises image authentic-ity; for instance, in the clock example, it spliced half of the reference image with the Eiffel Tower, generating a fabricated photograph. Qwen-Image-Edit struggles with maintaining correct proportions, as seen in the dog ex-ample where the scale appears disproportionate. Further-more, Seedream 4.0 demonstrates relatively poor subject fi-delity. Among all methods, DisCo successfully mitigates Subject DisCo Prompt          

> a wet
> candle
> adog in a
> firefighter
> outfit
> aclock with
> the Eiffel
> Tower in
> the
> background
> aberry
> bowl in the
> jungle
> a shiny
> cartoon
> Nano Banana Qwen -Image -Edit Seedream 4.0

Figure 8. Qualitative results with leading general image editing models. 

these specific weaknesses, achieving the most balanced per-formance across subject consistency, seamless integration, and overall image quality. You‘re writing a image-editing instruction to edit this image of the subject "subject" in three ways: 1. Change the identity attributes of the subject (e.g., color, texture, shape) to make it slightly different. 2. Introduce minor distortions or artifacts to the image that reduce its visual clarity or fidelity 3. Change the way the subject interacts with the environment or to create a fake or unnatural scene. Choose one of these strategies and write a concise instruction (1 to 2 sentences) that clearly describes how to make the image worse. Return in this json format: {{ "edit_instruction": the instruction that you wrote, }} 

Figure 9. The prompt used to generate editing instructions. 

## 8. Details of Reward Modeling 

Evaluating subject-driven text-to-image tasks requires a comprehensive understanding of both images and text in-structions. In this work, we employ a Vision Language Model (VLM) for reward modeling, capitalizing on its mul-timodal understanding capabilities. While a straightfor-ward approach would be pointwise evaluation (i.e., scor-ing a single image), such methods are often sensitive to mi-nor prompt variations and can produce noisy reward signals. Our reward modeling, therefore, builds on a pairwise com-parison framework within the Group Relative Policy Opti-mization (GRPO) stage. The core of this framework is the computation of the preference probability Pϕ(xi ≻ xj | cI , c T ), which indi-cates that the generated image xi is preferred over xj . cI

and cT are the reference image and text instruction, respec-tively, and ϕ is a preference predictor parameterized by a VLM. We compute this probability by presenting both im-ages, xi and xj , to a trained VLM ϕ and prompting it to se-lect the superior one given cI and cT . The normalized prob-ability of the output token corresponding to the choice “ xi

is better” is then used as the value for Pϕ(xi ≻ xj | cI , c T ).With this mechanism, the reward for a sample xi 

> 0

within a group of size G during GRPO training is defined as the sum of its win probabilities against all other samples in the group: 

Ri = X 

> 1≤j≤Gj̸=i

Pϕ(xi 

> 0

≻ xj 

> 0

| cI , c T ) (7) To get more robust preference predictions, we build a dataset of preference pairs and train the VLM ϕ. Instead of relying on manual annotation, we generate a synthetic dataset using the image generation model itself. For a given “positive” example (cI , c T , x 0) from the dataset, a VLM first crafts a “negative” editing instruction ˜cT . This instruc-tion intentionally introduces flaws, such as altering the sub-ject’s key attributes, creating inconsistencies with the origi-nal prompt cT , or producing unnatural compositions. Sub-sequently, we generate a negative sample ˜x0 by applying the editing instruction ˜cT to the original image x0 using the image generation model. This process yields a preference pair (x0 ≻ ˜x0), where the original image is preferred over the corrupted one. The VLM ϕ is then trained by minimizing the negative log-likelihood of these preferences: 

Lϕ = E(x0,˜x0,c I ,c T )∼D [− log Pϕ(x0 ≻ ˜x0 | cI , c T )] , (8) where D is our synthetically generated dataset of preference tuples. The prompts used to generate the negative editing in-structions ˜cT and to elicit pairwise judgements from ϕ are provided in Fig. 9 and Fig. 10, respectively. 

## 9. Prompt for VLM in the TVD Module 

We utilize Qwen2.5-VL-72B-Instruct as the VLM for textual-visual decoupling. The model is assigned two pri-You're labeling some preference data to train a subject -driven image generating model, where 1. The first given image is the original one (reference image), and the main subject "{subject}" is marked by a red bounding box. 2. The second and third images are the generated results 3. The generation is performed under this text instruction: "{instruction}". You should choose one of the two generated results based on these criterion: 1. Composition plausibility: The subject should be seamlessly and naturally integrated into the new context, with coherent lighting, perspective, and style. 2. Subject Consistency: the main subject should not deviate too much from that in the reference image, except indicated by the text instruction or changes in lighting, angle, size, position, etc. 3. Absence of Irrelevant Artifacts: The generated image should not retain any elements from the reference image that are unrelated to the subject (e.g., background remnants, unrelated objects, or visual clutter). 4. Overall image quality: The image should be free from visual artifacts, distortions, or unnatural features that detract from its realism and aesthetic appeal. Return a single letter for the better image: "A" if the second image is better, or "B" if the third image is better. 

Figure 10. The prompt used to train the reward model. 

mary tasks: (1) identifying the main subject by jointly an-alyzing the reference image and the input text prompt, and (2) rewriting the prompt such that the identified subject is replaced with a generic pronoun. The specific prompt used to guide VLM in this process is provided in Fig. 11. You are given :

1. A reference image .

2. A text prompt for a subject -driven image generation task, 

which involves the main subject inside the reference image .

Your task :

1. Identify the main subject in each image . Just the main 

subject, no description of the background .

2. Rewrite the prompt following these steps :

(1) Replace subject name with a single, generic pronoun or 

determiner, such as it, he/she, they, 'this item' .

(2) Keep other descriptions in the prompt intact, such as 

the background, the transformations of the subject, or other 

elements .

(3) (Optional) Paraphrase the sentence to accommodate the 

pronoun . This should only be for grammar purposes .

NOTE : You can NOT describe anything about the reference 

image in your rewritten prompt .

Return in this json format :

{

"subject" : the main subject in the reference image, 

"prompt" : the prompt that you rewrote 

}Figure 11. The prompt used in the TVD module.