Title: Bridging the Simulation-to-Experiment Gap with Generative Models using Adversarial Distribution Alignment

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2604.01169v1

Published Time: Thu, 02 Apr 2026 01:29:07 GMT

Number of Pages: 17

Markdown Content:
# Bridging the Simulation-to-Experiment Gap with Generative Models using Adversarial Distribution Alignment 

Kai Tyrus Nelson, ∗ Tobias Kreiman, ∗ Sergey Levine, and Aditi S. Krishnapriyan †

University of California, Berkeley 

A fundamental challenge in science and engineering is the simulation-to-experiment gap. While we often possess prior knowledge of physical laws, these physical laws can be too difficult to solve exactly for complex systems. Such systems are commonly modeled using simulators, which impose computational approximations. Meanwhile, experimental measurements more faithfully represent the real-world, but experimental data typically consists of observations that only partially reflect the system’s full underlying state. We propose a data-driven distribution alignment framework that bridges this simulation-to-experiment gap by pre-training a generative model on fully observed (but imperfect) simulation data, then aligning it with partial (but real) observations of experimental data. While our method is domain-agnostic, we ground our approach in the physical sciences by introducing Adversarial Distribution Alignment (ADA). This method aligns a generative model of atomic positions—initially trained on a simulated Boltzmann distribution—with the distribution of experimental observations. We prove that our method recovers the target observable distribution, even with multiple, potentially correlated observables. We also empirically validate our framework on synthetic, molecular, and experimental protein data, demonstrating that it can align generative models with diverse observables. Our code is available at https://kaityrusnelson.com/ada/ .

I. INTRODUCTION 

Physical laws precisely describe the behavior of matter, but solving them is often prohibitively expensive when applied to real-world systems. A central challenge in com-putational science is thus the development of accurate yet tractable models. For example, numerical simulation methods in atomistic modeling trade computational cost for accuracy by introducing various approximations from the classical to the quantum level [ 1– 5]. Despite their sim-plifying assumptions, by predicting physical properties in silico , accurate computational models can reduce reliance on expensive laboratory experiments. Meanwhile, direct experimental measurements better reflect the real world, but exact measurements of the full underlying state of a system can be costly or com-pletely inaccessible. Consequently, experimental data often only reflects partial observations of the real world. Although latent variable models can be used to reason about partially observed systems [ 6, 7 ], such models can be data-intensive and challenging to train in practice, es-pecially in experimental settings where measurements are expensive. As a result, this leaves a discrepancy between abundant, fully-observed but approximate simulation data and scarce, partially-observed but more accurate experi-mental measurements: a discrepancy which we refer to as the simulation-to-experiment gap .To address this gap, we propose Adversarial Dis-tribution Alignment from Partial Observations (ADA) , an algorithm that first learns a generative model of fully observed simulated data, and then aligns it with   

> ∗Denotes equal contribution
> †Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory (LBNL) Corresponding author: kai nelson@berkeley.edu

FIG. 1. ADA aligns generative models trained on approximate simulation data with the real world by leveraging partial experimental observations. (1) ADA starts from a base generative model μbase (x) trained on simulation data, such as molecular dynamics simulations using a classical force field. (2) ADA aligns the base model with multiple, potentially correlated partial experimental observations (e.g., radial distribution functions (RDFs) or nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) measurements). (3) ADA yields an aligned model μθ (x) that approximates the true underlying real-world distribution ν(x). 

partially observed experimental measurements (see Fig-ure 1). ADA aligns the model with experimental observ-able distributions via a min–max objective. Our algorithm alternates between learning to distinguish observable sam-ples generated by the model from samples drawn from the experimental dataset, and updating the generative model accordingly. By leveraging real-world data as a scalable source of supervision, ADA helps bridge the simulation-to-experiment gap when training machine learning models of the physical world. Importantly, these real-world data distributions cor-respond to the true targets of interest in downstream applications such as materials and drug discovery, where 

> arXiv:2604.01169v1 [cs.LG] 1 Apr 2026

2accurate property prediction enables screening of promis-ing candidates. For example, ADA can align a genera-tive model of protein structures—pre-trained on classical molecular dynamics simulations as the initial physical prior—with high-dimensional, noisy cryo-EM observa-tions to better capture the real-world distribution of pro-tein states (amino acid positions). We preview such an application in Section IV C. Our main contribution is the introduction of ADA as a framework that leverages physical knowledge through simulated data, while mitigating the approximation errors of purely simulation-based approaches by aligning to real-world distributions. We prove that ADA recovers the target observable distribution, even in the presence of multiple, potentially correlated observables. We also show empirically that ADA can align generative models to diverse molecular and protein observables, with alignment to experimental distributions improving as additional observables are incorporated.  

> II. DISTRIBUTION MATCHING WITH OBSERVABLES

Our goal is to train a generative model μθ (x) that matches the distribution of observables measured from an underlying system ν(x). In this context, we define observables to be any function of the state of the system 

x:

o(i) : X → O(i) ⊆ Rki ,

where ki is the dimensionality of the observable i, and 

i ∈ { 1, . . . , m } = I indexes the m observables. We only assume access to the observable quantities drawn from our underlying system, and presume no direct access to the distribution of true states ν(x). We additionally note that our m observables may be arbitrarily correlated. In general, modeling ν(x) is challenging because the amount of data for the full system might be limited or impossible to access, leaving observables that only of-fer a partial view of the underlying system. Therefore, to make it more feasible to model ν(x), we leverage a model, μbase (x), pre-trained on fully observed data from an imperfect simulator of the experimental distribution, e.g., data generated from a numerical simulation. Our goal is to shift the base distribution to produce a learned distribution μθ (x), which satisfies the constraint: 

o(i)# μθ = o(i)# ν, ∀i, (1) where o(i)# ν denotes the pushforward of the distribution ν

through the observable o(i), that is, the probability distri-bution over observable i obtained by sampling x ∼ ν(x)and mapping it to o(i)(x). Succinctly, we wish to learn a distribution μθ whose observables match the experimental observable distribution. The objective in Equation (1) is generally under-constrained, since the observable is only a partial obser-vation of the underlying system, and many states could map to the same observable value. Therefore, we reg-ularize the solution by enforcing closeness to the base distribution via a KL divergence. This acts as an in-formed prior, supplementing sparse and lossy real world data with reasonably accurate simulator data. If we de-fine Mo(X ) = {μ : o(i)# μ = o(i)# ν; ∀i ∈ I} to be the set of all probability measures satisfying Equation (1), our full objective becomes: arg min 

> μθ

DKL (μθ ∥ μbase )s.t. μθ ∈ M o(X ).

(2) From an information-theoretic perspective, Equation (2) corresponds to an information projection of the base distri-bution onto the set of distributions satisfying the observ-able constraints, with the KL term acting as an entropic regularizer (see Figure 2). We note the connection be-tween this objective and inverse reinforcement learning (IRL), where the goal is to learn a reward function ex-plaining expert behavior [ 8, 9 ]. In this framework, the learned reward implicitly distinguishes expert behavior from that induced by the current policy, and the policy is iteratively improved by optimizing this reward. In our setting, we have experimental observables instead of expert trajectories, while the policy corresponds to a generative model. In contrast to prior work that matches only expectations of reference features, our formulation seeks to match the full distribution of multiple, potentially correlated observables.  

> A. Comparison of our Problem Setting to Conditional Generation and Expectation Alignment

To build intuition about our problem setting, we first contrast it with other related formulations. We discuss conditional generative modeling and expectation align-ment (EA) approaches [ 10 – 12 ], which align distributions by matching observable moments, to motivate our full algorithm in Section II B. 

a. Comparison with conditional generative modeling. 

We first consider conditional generative modeling, which explicitly factorizes the target distribution into an ob-servable prior and a generative model conditioned on an observable value. If one had access to a paired dataset 

D = (xj , o (i) 

> j

= o(i)(xj )) , one could attempt to satisfy Equation (2) by training a conditional model μbase (x | o(i) 

> j

)and sampling from: μθ (x) = R μbase (x | o(i))dν (o(i)).

While this approach is viable when paired samples are available for a single observable, it fails in the multi-observable setting when we have access only to marginal distributions {ν(o(i))}mi=1 . Having access only to marginals prevents conditioning on values sampled 3from the joint distribution of observables, making it im-possible to simultaneously satisfy the observable and KL constraints in Equation (2). 

b. Comparison to expectation alignment methods. 

We additionally contrast our problem setting, which matches full distributions, with methods that align only to observable expectations. Throughout this paper, we refer to this class of methods as expectation alignment (EA) . In this formulation, one seeks a distribution μθ

that minimizes a KL divergence to a base distribution while matching the expected values of a prescribed set of observables: arg min 

> μθ

DKL (μθ ∥ μbase )s.t. Ex∼μθ [o(i)(x)] = Ex∼ν [o(i)(x)] , ∀i ∈ I. 

(3) In theory, under mild regularity assumptions, EA can recover the full distribution-matching objective. This follows by augmenting the observable set with all poly-nomial moments, since enforcing Equation (3) over this family corresponds to matching all mixed moments of the observable distributions. In the limit of infinitely many moments, this uniquely identifies the observable marginals and recovers the solution to Equation (2). In practice, however, this approach is infeasible: the number of moments grows combinatorially with the ob-servable dimension and degree, and exact recovery of the target distribution generally requires matching infinitely many moments (see Section IV A for an empirical exam-ple). From this perspective, matching the full observable distribution amounts to enforcing equality over a suffi-ciently rich class of test functions of the observables. We instead propose parameterizing a discriminator as a neural network that directly learns functions of the observables, enabling full distributional alignment beyond matching a finite number of moments. 

B. Adversarial Distribution Alignment with Partial Observations (ADA) 

We now present our algorithm, Adversarial Distribu-tion Alignment with Partial Observations (ADA), which performs full distributional alignment using only partial observations. To realize Equation (2), we re-frame the objective as a dual optimization problem, learning the Wasserstein distance between generated and real experi-mental observables in the same way as Arjovsky et al. [13] .Together with the known connections between GANs and inverse reinforcement learning [ 14 , 15 ], this motivates an adversarial optimization procedure for Equation (2). Specifically, to enforce the observable constraint in Equation (1), we use a Wasserstein distance over the space of observables to learn a pseudo-metric over state distributions. We will refer to this pseudo-metric as the observable Wasserstein distance. For each observable, we 

FIG. 2. ADA finds the closest distribution μ∗ 

> θ

to a base distribution μbase that satisfies the observable constraints o(i)# μθ = o(i)# ν for all observables 

i ∈ { 1, . . . , m }. The resulting feasible set is denoted by 

Mo(X ) (shown in orange). The KL term in Equation (2) acts as an entropic regularizer, reflecting the fact that the observable constraints in Equation (1) do not uniquely specify the underlying distribution, since many states can map to the same observable values. The discriminator f (i) 

> ϕ

learns the observable Wasserstein distance to align the model with the distributional observable constraint. 

define the observable Wasserstein distance between the learned and target distributions as follows: 

d(i)(μ, ν ) = sup  

> f(i)∈Lips(1)



Eo(i)# μ[f (i)] − Eo(i)# ν [f (i)]



, (4) where Lips (1) is the class of all Lipschitz-1 functions. In practice, this Wasserstein distance is approximated by learning a discriminator f (i) 

> θ

(o(i)(x)) with a local Lipschitz constant enforced by a gradient penalty [13]. We then parameterize the soft version of our constraint objective (Equation (2)) as: arg max 

> μθ

− DKL (μθ ∥ μbase ) − β X

> i∈I

d(i)(μθ , ν ), (5) which corresponds to the mini-max objective: max 

> μθ

min  

> (f(i))∈Lip(1) |I|

L μθ , (f (i)), β 

where 

L μθ , (f (i)), β  = −DKL 

 μθ ∥ μbase 



+ β X

> i∈I



E(o(i))#μθ [f (i)] − E(o(i))#ν [f (i)]



.

(6) We propose to alternate between learning our observ-able Wasserstein distance and improving our generative model to find the distribution closest to our base model that matches the target observable distribution (Figure 2). 4

a. Algorithm summary. We summarize our overall algorithm. We first initialize our generative model as 

μθ = μbase , where μbase is trained on the simulated data distribution. Starting from this initialization, our algo-rithm iterates the following three steps to align μθ with the experimental data. (see Alg. 1). First, we sample from the current iteration of the aligned generative model 

μθ (x). We then evaluate observables from the generated samples and compute the Lagrangian of our objective (Equation (6)). We finally update the generative model and the discriminators using stochastic gradient descent on the Lagrangian. We also emphasize that each discrim-inator may be trained independently per observable. As we will show later in Section II C, this is sufficient for satisfying the desired observable constraints, even in the case of multiple, correlated observables. Table I summarizes the capability of ADA and com-pares it with conditional generative modeling and EA approaches discussed in Section II A. In short, while con-ditional generation can handle single observables and EA methods can align with a finite set of moments, ADA can recover the full distribution of multiple, potentially correlated observables.[16] 

b. Practical implementation details. We describe how we optimize the Lagrangian Equation (6), which balances the observable Wasserstein distance with the prior. We note that the Lagrangian does not need to be explicitly calculated as long as we can optimize μ and ( f (i)) with respect to it. Many methods which are capable of optimiz-ing a generative model with respect to a reward function could work in practice. In this work, we parameterize 

μθ and μbase as diffusion models [ 17 ] and we use adjoint matching [ 18 ] to obtain unbiased gradient estimates of the Lagrangian with respect to μ without requiring back-propagation through the sampling process. This enables efficient optimization of the distribution μ directly. We note that adjoint matching requires observables to be differentiable. Although this may seem restrictive, many structural observables and energy functions can be computed efficiently in a differentiable manner, and entropy regularized reinforcement learning could be used in the case of non-differentiable observables [19, 20]. 

C. Theoretical Convergence Analysis 

We now address the theoretical guarantees of our ob-jective. Our goal with the theoretical analysis is to show that the objective in Equation (6), (1) has a unique solu-tion and (2) converges to the desired reference observable distribution o(i)# ν as we increase the weight β on the ob-servable Wasserstein distance. We first build intuition by analyzing the scenario where there is only a single observable, and then provide theorems for the general case of multiple, potentially correlated observables. 

a. Single observable case. For the case of a single observable, we can directly solve Equation (2) to find the optimal distribution. Following previous work [ 8, 9 , 21 ], 

ALGORITHM 1. Adversarial Distribution Alignment from a Pretrained Generative Model  

> 1:

Input:  

> 2:

Pretrained base generator μbase (x) 

> 3:

Experimental observable datasets D(i) = { o(i) 

> j

∼

(o(i))#ν } for each observable i ∈ I 

> 4:

Initialize:  

> 5:

Generator parameters θ with μθ ← μbase  

> 6:

Observable critics f (i) 

> ϕ(i)

: Oi → R for all i ∈ I 

> 7: 8:

while not converged do  

> 9:

Sample model configurations {xj }Nj=1 ∼ μθ 

> 10:

for each observable i ∈ I do  

> 11:

Compute model observables u(i) 

> j

← o(i)(xj ) 

> 12:

Sample reference observables {˜o(i) 

> j

}Nj=1 ∼ D (i) 

> 13:

end for  

> 14:

Construct empirical push forward measures: (o(i))#μθ ≈ 1

N

> N

X

> j=1

δu(i)

> j

, (o(i))#ν ≈ 1

N

> N

X

> j=1

δ˜o(i)

> j

L(θ, {ϕ(i)}) = −DKL 

 μθ ∥ μbase 



+ β X

> i∈I



E(o(i))#μθ [f (i) 

> ϕ(i)

] − E(o(i))#ν [f (i) 

> ϕ(i)

]



. 

> 15:

Update generator (ascent, use Adjoint Matching to com-pute ∇θ L): 

θ ← θ + ηθ ∇θ L 

> 16:

for each observable i ∈ I do  

> 17:

Update critic (descent): 

ϕ(i) ← ϕ(i) − ηϕ∇ϕ(i) L 

> 18:

end for  

> 19:

end while 

we consider the Lagrangian of the hard constrained opti-mization problem. To delineate it from the Lagrangian of Equation (5), we denote it by Z:

Z(μθ , λ, α ) = 

Z

dx μ θ (x) log 

 μθ (x)

μbase (x)



+

Z

do λ (o) ν(o) − μθ (o)

+ α

Z 

dx μ θ (x) − 1



(7) where μθ (o) = R dxδ (o−o(x)) μθ (x) using δ as the Dirac delta function. We also note that there is a Lagrange multiplier for each value the observable could take on (λ(o)). If we differentiate to find the optimal μθ , we find that: 

μθ (x) = μbase (x) eλ(o(x))  

> Z

. To solve for λ(o(x)), we note 5that by definition of the Dirac delta function: 

μθ (o) = 

Z

dxδ (o − o(x)) μθ (x) = μbase (o) eλ(o)

Z . (8) Considering our constraint on the observable distribution: 

ν(o) = μθ (o) = μbase (o)eλ(o)/Z, we see that: λ(o) = log( Z ν (o)/μ base (o)) , yielding a final distribution: 

μ∗ 

> θ

(x) = μbase (x) ν(o)

μbase (o) (9) that satisfies μθ (o) = ν(o). In short, for a single observ-able, Equation (2) has a solution that recovers the target observable distribution by tilting the base distribution towards regions where it underrepresents the observable density. Although solving for the closed-form tilted dis-tribution is possible for a single observable— since we can estimate ν(o) from samples—the same derivation in the multi-observable setting would require access to the joint distribution of experimental observables (see Sec-tion II A for details). Since we assume access only to marginal observable distributions, we instead provide a different analysis to handle the multi-observable case in the following section. 

b. General case. Analyzing the general case with multiple observables, requires more care. We present the following guarantees: 

Theorem II.1 (Existence and uniqueness of the saddle point) . Assume X is a compact Polish space and that 

μbase has full support on X. Additionally, allow o(i) to be continuous for i ∈ I. For any β ∈ R, Equation (6) 

admits a saddle point (μ∗, (f (i))∗), where μ∗ is unique. Consequently, the recovered distribution is well defined. We denote this solution by μ∗ ∈ sol L β.Proof. The proof is done through Sion’s Theorem utilizing the compactness of probability measures in weak* (see Section B 1 for the full proof) 

Theorem II.2 (Asymptotic convergence in Wasserstein) .

Assume DKL (ν∥μbase ) < ∞. Let μ∗ 

> β

∈ sol L β for β ∈

R+. Then, as β → ∞ , we have 

d(i)(μ∗ 

> β

, ν ) → 0 for all i ∈ I. 

Proof. The proof follows from DKL (ν∥μbase ) < ∞ pro-viding a bound on our Lagrangian under optimality (see Section B 2) 

Theorem II.3 (Asymptotic convergence to the constraint set) . Let (μ∗ 

> β

)β> 0 be the sequence of saddle-point solutions from Theorem B.2. Suppose that d(i)(μ∗ 

> β

, ν ) → 0 for all 

i ∈ I. Then any weak limit point ¯μ of (μ∗ 

> β

) satisfies 

(o(i))# ¯μ = ( o(i))#ν for all i ∈ I, 

that is, ¯μ ∈ M o.Proof. This is a simple extension of Theorem B.2, and is included to relate the convergence in observable Wasser-stein to Equation (2). We prove this in Section B 3. To summarize, our algorithm in theory converges and will be arbitrarily close to satisfying the constraint set for a sufficiently large β. Although the KL constraint on Theorem B.2 may seem overly restrictive, we note that this constraint is satisfied for many models of interest. For instance, any set of particles in a closed and bounded box with positive density are sufficient. We also note that we have imposed no unnecessary restrictions on the push forward of our observables, only that they continuously map to real valued vector domains. We have not required that they be independent or uncorrelated. In fact, as long as the experimental dataset can be realized by a real measure with finite KL divergence from the base measure, we are able to get arbitrarily close to matching the observable measures in Wasserstein distance.  

> III. RELATED WORK

a. Generative models. ADA builds on previous gen-erative modeling frameworks. We parameterize μbase and 

μθ as use diffusion models [ 17 , 22 ], which learn to reverse a stochastic process that gradually corrupts samples from a data distribution into noise. Generative adversarial networks (GANs) [ 23 ] are also closely related to our work. GANs learn a target distribution by alternating between learning a discriminator, which distinguishes real samples from generated ones, and a generator trained to fool the discriminator. ADA builds upon the GAN framework to learn distributions in the partially observed setting. 

b. Maximum entropy inverse reinforcement learning. 

Adversarial training also plays a central role in inverse reinforcement learning (IRL) [ 9, 24 ], where the objective is to infer a reward function that explains observed behavior and to extract a policy consistent with that reward. The connection between GANs and IRL has been noted in prior work [ 14 , 15 ], where the learned reward function acts as a discriminator and the policy serves as the generator. The maximum entropy IRL formulation [ 8 , 9], which augments reward learning with an entropic regularizer, closely aligns with our problem setting. However, rather than inferring a policy from demonstrations, we seek to align a generative model with experimental observations while leveraging simulated data as a prior. Importantly, we only leverage partial observations without requiring demonstrations of the full underlying state. 

c. Learning from partial observations in atomistic gen-erative modeling. In the context of computational chem-istry and biology, experimental observables have been used to improve models through Iterative Boltzmann Inversion (IBI) [ 12 , 25 – 27 ], which iteratively refines an empirical pairwise potential to reproduce target structural observables, most commonly radial distribution functions. More recent simulation-in-the-loop approaches [ 28 – 31 ] use 6                        

> TABLE I. Observable Alignment naturally handles multiple observables. Our method learns the marginal distribution of multiple, potentially correlated observables directly from data via a discriminator. In contrast, guidance-based approaches typically target a single observable and offer no guarantees for aligning multiple (potentially correlated) observables. To match the distribution of a single observable, guidance would need to rely on conditioning on samples from the target observable distribution (indicated by a △), whereas Observable Alignment learns the distribution directly from data.
> Method Match Expectation Match Distribution Requires Training
> Single Multiple Single Multiple
> Conditional Generative Model ✓✗✓✗classifier (or CFG)
> Expectation Alignment ✓✓✗✗generator
> ADA (ours) ✓✓✓✓generator + discriminator

automatic differentiation to improve a machine learning force field using observable quantities. Most similar to our approach is concurrent work that aligns the outputs of a generative model using a linear reward [10]. However, we emphasize that these prior methods that leverage observables typically frame their objective as an 

expectation alignment (EA) problem [11 , 12 , 28 , 32 – 35 ]. For instance, guidance methods [ 32 –34 ] modify the score of a diffusion model, often with a trained classifier, to produce samples that match the moments of observables. Similarly, Smith et al. [10] fix a linear reward signal that they use to fine-tune a generative model to match the expectation of an observable. While in theory these EA approaches could learn a full distribution by enforcing infinitely many moments of the target distribution, this is in practice infeasible and modeling only a finite number of moments leads to discrepancies, even in low dimensions (see Section II A and Section IV A). Our problem setting differs in that we aim to match the full distribution of observed experimental data rather than only low-order statistics. For example, in computational biology, matching a single, expected protein conformation is insufficient; modeling the full experimental distribu-tion is necessary to study folding and unfolding events, compute free energies, and estimate transition rates. Fur-thermore, instead of relying on a single reward signal as in the IRL formulation, we consider multiple, potentially correlated experimental observables that jointly constrain the target distribution. ADA extends the EA and IRL formulations to handle full distributional constraints over multiple observables.  

> IV. EXPERIMENTS

We evaluate ADA ’s ability to align a generative model, pretrained on simulate data, with experimental distribu-tions using only partial observations. We first compare ADA to EA approaches similar to Smith et al. [10] to underscore the difference between full distributional align-ment and moment matching (Section IV A). Next, to obtain controlled evaluation metrics, we use simulated data at increasing levels of fidelity to quantify how align-ment improves as additional observables are provided (Section IV B). Finally, we assess ADA’s ability to bridge the gap between a generative model trained on classical force field simulations and experimental measurements from the Protein Data Bank using cryo-EM observables [36 ] (Section IV C). We provide experimental details, in-cluding further discussion of the chosen observables, in Section A.  

> A. Synthetic Data

To illustrate the limitations of EA methods, we con-sider a synthetic three-dimensional mixture-of-Gaussians benchmark (see Figure 5). We define the base distribu-tion μbase as an isotropic mixture with eight components located at the vertices of a cube, with uniform mixture weights. We define the target distribution ν by perturbing the variances and mixture weights for the Gaussians (see Section A for more details). We choose observables o(i) : R3 → R2 as the three pair-wise coordinate projections: πXi,X j (x1, x 2, x 3) = ( xi, x j ).

Despite their simplicity, these observables induce corre-lated, multimodal marginals. For evaluation, we report two metrics: (1) the Wasserstein-1 distance between energy histograms of generated samples, where E(x) = − log ν(x), and (2) the cluster assignment accuracy via the KL divergence 

DKL (μθ (z) ∥ ν(z)) , where μθ (z) = R μθ (x)ν(z | x) dx de-notes the induced mixture weights of generated samples. Intuitively, these metrics quantify discrepancies in global energy structure and mass allocation across modes, re-spectively. 

a. Results. In Table V and Figure 3, we find that ADA successfully recovers the full target distribution us-ing the correlated projection observables. In contrast, EA fails even when enforcing moments up to fourth or-der. Recovering a multimodal distribution from finitely many moments is not possible in general, and the number of moments that need to be enforced scales polynomi-ally with the dimension of the problem, highlighting the fundamental limitations of expectation-based alignment.  

> B. Correlated Small Molecule Observables

We next evaluate whether ADA can align molecular conformational distributions using multiple correlated 7    

> FIG. 3. Comparison between expectation alignment (EA) and ADA on synthetic mixture-of-Gaussians benchmark. We align a base distribution, defined as a mixture of Gaussians centered at the corners of a cube, with a target distribution where the variances and mixture weights have been perturbed. For the observables, we use pairwise coordinate projections, yielding correlated, multimodal marginals. We report the ℓ1pdf residual between target and generated distributions before and after alignment. ADA consistently achieves larger reductions in distributional error on multidimensional observables, even when EA uses three moments. This is taken from a kernel density estimate of 2000 samples.

structural observables, and whether incorporating ob-servables improves alignment both on constrained and held-out quantities. As a controlled proxy for simulation-to-real transfer, we consider two simulator fidelities on the MD17 small-molecule benchmark [ 37 ], aligning a low-cost semi-empirical GFN2-xTB potential [ 1] to a higher-fidelity density functional theory (DFT) reference using only observable-level supervision. We progressively add structural observables to the align-ment procedure—including the mean interatomic distance (MD), radius of gyration ( Rg ), bond lengths, hydrogen-bond distance, and COOH–ester distance (details in Sec-tion A 2)—to study ADA ’s ability to reconcile multiple correlated marginals while preserving underlying molecu-lar structure. For evaluation, we report two complementary metrics. First, for each observable we compute the Wasserstein-1 distance ( W1) between histograms of generated and tar-get samples, measuring marginal distributional alignment. Beyond marginal comparisons, we evaluate the model’s ability to recover free energy surfaces (FES) over pairs of physically meaningful observables. For each observable we bin both the reference and generated samples into a joint 2D histogram, normalize each to a discrete prob-ability distribution, and compute the Jensen–Shannon divergence. We report this over three observable pairs on aspirin, capturing hydrogen-bonding geometry, molecular compactness, and functional group arrangement. 

a. Results. Figure 6 and Table II show that ADA consistently improves alignment to the DFT target as additional observables are incorporated. Across all observ-ables, ADA achieves substantially lower W1 as compared to EA while simultaneously reducing FES JSD, indicating that it preserves molecular correlations while enforcing accurate marginal constraints.    

> C. Noisy and High-Dimensional Cryo-EM Observable with Experimental Data
> FIG. 4. ADA shifts the simulated distribution to align with the experimentally measured Trp-cage structures by using only noisy, high-dimensional cryo-EM images. The base generative model is trained on MD simulations using a classical force field. ADA uses the cryo-EM images as observables to align with the experimental structures from the PDB. The long MD simulations run by a classical force field sample the unfolded states more often than seen in the 2JOF PDB entry, leading to a longer tail in the radius of gyration observable.

Finally, we use the coarse-grained fast-folding proteins [38 , 39 ] as a test bed for aligning to experimental data using measurements from the Protein Data Bank (PDB) [36 ]. We first train a base model to match the Boltzmann distribution induced by molecular dynamics simulations using a classical force field [ 38 , 39 ]. Starting from this base model, we then use experimental structures of the Trp-cage (ID 2JOF) and BBL (ID 2WXC) proteins from the PDB as our target distribution [40]. For this experiment, ADA uses cryo-EM images as observables. We simulate the image formation from the 8

TABLE II. ADA improves in alignment to the target distribution when given access to an increasing number of observables. We train a base model on constant-temperature molecular dynamics simulations using the semi-empirical GFN2-xTB potential. This model is then aligned with the distribution induced by a more accurate DFT potential using structural observables. Each column reports the distance to the reference DFT observable distribution. Moving down the rows of the table adds observables to the alignment procedure, with the bottom row representing aligning with the full observable set: mean interatomic distance (MD), radius of gyration ( Rg ), bond lengths, hydrogen-bond distance, and COOH–ester distance. The upper-triangular part of the left side of the table represents improvements on held-out observables (highlighted in purple). We additionally report improvement on Jensen-Shannon divergences on three fully held-out free energy surfaces: (MD, Rg), (bond length, H-bond distance), and (H-bond distance, COOH–ester distance). These surfaces are not used during training (indicated by the purple highlight) and therefore measure preservation of joint molecular structure beyond the enforced observable marginals. Compared to Expectation Alignment (EA), ADA better aligns to the target distribution (indicated with bold), especially with additional observables.                                                                                                                    

> Observable marginals W1↓Held-out FES JSD ↓
> Constraint MD RgBond Hbond COOH ABCOurs EA Ours EA Ours EA Ours EA Ours EA Ours EA Ours EA Ours EA Base 0.06 0.02 0.018 0.40 0.50 0.22 0.44 0.38 + MD 0.008 0.012 0.020 0.009 0.007 0.010 0.25 0.41 0.37 0.39 0.23 0.20 0.40 0.41 0.35 0.35
> + RoG 0.009 0.012 0.010 0.009 0.010 0.011 0.30 0.41 0.43 0.48 0.20 0.19 0.42 0.40 0.35 0.34
> + Bond 0.004 0.019 0.005 0.009 0.004 0.009 0.21 0.36 0.46 0.48 0.15 0.20 0.41 0.43 0.36 0.36
> + Hbond 0.007 0.017 0.009 0.010 0.006 0.011 0.06 0.19 0.39 0.39 0.13 0.36 0.39 0.43 0.33 0.36 + COOH 0.009 0.009 0.002 0.012 0.006 0.011 0.06 0.31 0.04 0.06 0.08 0.17 0.13 0.20 0.09 0.19

reference experimental structures [ 41 ], yielding noisy, high-dimensional observables (128 × 128 pixels, see Figure 4 and Figure 7). We choose this evaluation setting since it provides a challenging and realistic benchmark that measures ADA’s ability to improve a prior derived from classical simulations using a small set ( < 30 structures) of real-world structures. Simulating the forward cryo-EM imaging enables us to control the level of noise of the observable and allows us to provide precise evalua-tion metrics by comparing to the reference experimental structures. For evaluation, we report the W1 distance to other structural observables to see how ADA improves align-ment to held-out observables. To measure ADA’s ability to recover the underlying full state distribution from the cryo-EM images, we also measure the maximum Kabsch-aligned RMSD to the experimental amino acid positions. We provide further details in Section A 4. 

a. Results. Figure 4 and Table III show how ADA aligns the base generative model to the distribution of experimental protein structures using the cryo-EM im-age observable. In line with the molecular experiments, ADA decreases the Wasserstein distance on other, held-out observables by up to 86%. Beyond observables, ADA also reduces the maximum Kabsch-aligned RMSD to the experimental structures, indicating fewer extreme devia-tions in the underlying amino acid positions. Even when we decrease the signal-to-noise ratio (SNR) for the cryo-EM observable, ADA improves the base distribution’s alignment with the experimental data. This experiment underscores the importance of ADA’s full distributional alignment; simply matching the ex-pectation of the high-dimensional cryo-EM observable, due to the low SNR, would yield an observable dis-tribution matching the average noise. Similarly, im-posing a sufficient number of moment constraints for 

TABLE III. ADA aligns a generative model trained on simulated data from a classical force field with experimental protein structures from the PDB using, noisy, high-dimensional cryo-EM images. We pre-train a generative model on samples of fast-folding proteins obtained from molecular dynamics simulations using a classical force field [ 38 ]. Using only the noisy cryo-EM images, ADA improves alignment with the underlying experimental distribution of structures, as measured by the Wasserstein distance to other, held-out observables. The maximum Kabsch-aligned RMSD to the experimental structures also decreases, indicating better distributional alignment at level of amino acid positions. 

W1 to Experiment ( ↓) Max RMSD MeanDist Rg (nm, ↓)Trp-Cage Base 1.26 1.07 1.18 ADA (SNR 1.0) 0.17 0.21 0.91 ADA (SNR 0.1) 0.28 0.36 0.96 

BBL Base 1.36 1.08 1.76 ADA (SNR 1.0) 0.21 0.18 1.38 ADA (SNR 0.1) 0.27 0.33 1.36 

the 128 × 128 = 16 , 384 dimensional distribution would be impractical, as shown by the synthetic experiment in Section IV A. Appropriately scaled, this experiment demonstrates the potential of ADA to leverage a large dataset of noisy experimental measurements to bridge the simulation-to-experiment gap. 

V. CONCLUSION 

In this work, we introduced ADA, an iterative algo-rithm for bridging the gap between simulation and ex-9periment by alternating between distinguishing low- and high-fidelity samples and refining a generative model ac-cordingly. We provided both theoretical guarantees and empirical evidence that ADA can align a classical force field with experimental measurements, and that its per-formance improves as additional observables are incorpo-rated, even when these observables are correlated. While our experiments focus on observables derived from a single state, the proposed objective naturally ex-tends to dynamic observables, such as an autocorrelation function, presenting an important direction for future work. Moreover, although we evaluate ADA on widely used benchmarks, these datasets remain a simplified proxy for the scale and complexity encountered at the frontier of biomolecular research. Real experimental data are also often noisy and expensive to obtain, posing additional challenges that must be addressed to enable broader de-ployment. At the same time, the observation that ADA improves with an increasing number of observables suggests that scaling this approach with more computational resources and experimental datasets could further improve perfor-mance. We also hope that the development of algorithms capable of effectively leveraging experimental measure-ments at scale will motivate the creation of more standard-ized and widely accessible experimental datasets. Finally, while our experiments are grounded in computational chemistry, we emphasize that ADA is not domain-specific and provides a general framework for learning from cor-related partial observations. By combining structured simulated priors with real-world measurements, ADA rep-resents a step toward models that more faithfully align with the real world. 

Acknowledgments. We thank James Bowden and Sanjeev Raja for feedback on the manuscript. We thank Nithin Chalapathi for feedback on the cryo-EM exper-iments and Michael Psenka for feedback on the proofs. This research was partly supported by Laboratory Di-rected Research and Development (LDRD) funding under the Department of Energy Contract Number DE-AC02-05CH11231, DARPA TIAMAT, and the Toyota Research Institute as part of the Synthesis Advanced Research Challenge. 

[1] C. Bannwarth, S. Ehlert, and S. Grimme, Gfn2-xtb—an accurate and broadly parametrized self-consistent tight-binding quantum chemical method with multipole elec-trostatics and density-dependent dispersion contribu-tions, Journal of Chemical Theory and Computation 15 ,1652–1671 (2019). [2] W. Kohn and L. J. Sham, Self-consistent equations in-cluding exchange and correlation effects, Physical review 

140 , A1133 (1965). [3] J. ˇC´ ıˇ zek, On the correlation problem in atomic and molec-ular systems. calculation of wavefunction components in ursell-type expansion using quantum-field theoretical methods, The Journal of Chemical Physics 45 , 4256–4266 (1966). [4] A. D. MacKerell, D. Bashford, M. Bellott, R. L. Dun-brack, J. D. Evanseck, M. J. Field, S. Fischer, J. Gao, H. Guo, S. Ha, D. Joseph-McCarthy, L. Kuchnir, K. Kucz-era, F. T. K. Lau, C. Mattos, S. Michnick, T. Ngo, D. T. Nguyen, B. Prodhom, W. E. Reiher, B. Roux, M. Schlenkrich, J. C. Smith, R. Stote, J. Straub, M. Watanabe, J. Wi´ orkiewicz-Kuczera, D. Yin, and M. Karplus, All-atom empirical potential for molecular modeling and dynamics studies of proteins, The Journal of Physical Chemistry B 102 , 3586–3616 (1998). [5] W. D. Cornell, P. Cieplak, C. I. Bayly, I. R. Gould, K. M. Merz, D. M. Ferguson, D. C. Spellmeyer, T. Fox, J. W. Caldwell, and P. A. Kollman, A second generation force field for the simulation of proteins, nucleic acids, and organic molecules, Journal of the American Chemical Society 117 , 5179–5197 (1995). [6] M. J. Wainwright and M. I. Jordan, Graphical models, ex-ponential families, and variational inference, Foundations and Trends ® in Machine Learning 1, 1–305 (2008). [7] D. Bartholomew, M. Knott, and I. Moustaki, Latent Vari-able Models and Factor Analysis: A Unified Approach 

(Wiley, 2011). [8] E. T. Jaynes, Information theory and statistical mechan-ics, Physical Review 106 , 620–630 (1957). [9] B. D. Ziebart, A. Maas, J. A. Bagnell, and A. K. Dey, Maximum entropy inverse reinforcement learning, in Pro-ceedings of the 23rd National Conference on Artificial Intelligence - Volume 3 , AAAI’08 (AAAI Press, 2008) p. 1433–1438. [10] H. D. Smith, N. L. Diamant, and B. L. Trippe, Calibrating generative models to distributional constraints (2026), arXiv:2510.10020 [stat.ML]. [11] A. Cesari, S. Reißer, and G. Bussi, Using the maximum entropy principle to combine simulations and solution experiments, Computation 6, 15 (2018). [12] A. Soper, Empirical potential monte carlo simulation of fluid structure, Chemical Physics 202 , 295–306 (1996). [13] M. Arjovsky, S. Chintala, and L. Bottou, Wasserstein gan (2017), arXiv:1701.07875 [stat.ML]. [14] C. Finn, P. Christiano, P. Abbeel, and S. Levine, A con-nection between generative adversarial networks, inverse reinforcement learning, and energy-based models (2016), arXiv:1611.03852 [cs.LG]. [15] J. Ho and S. Ermon, Generative adversarial imitation learning (2016), arXiv:1606.03476 [cs.LG]. [16] In contexts where we only have access to a distributional mean, ADA can subsume EA based alignment by restrict-ing the function class to a linear discriminator. This is well studied in the inverse reinforcement learning literature Ziebart et al. [9]. [17] Y. Song, J. Sohl-Dickstein, D. P. Kingma, A. Kumar, S. Ermon, and B. Poole, Score-based generative mod-eling through stochastic differential equations (2021), arXiv:2011.13456 [cs.LG]. [18] C. Domingo-Enrich, M. Drozdzal, B. Karrer, and R. T. Q. Chen, Adjoint matching: Fine-tuning flow and diffusion 10 

generative models with memoryless stochastic optimal control (2025), arXiv:2409.08861 [cs.LG]. [19] R. J. Williams, Simple statistical gradient-following algo-rithms for connectionist reinforcement learning, Machine Learning 8, 229–256 (1992). [20] J. Schulman, F. Wolski, P. Dhariwal, A. Radford, and O. Klimov, Proximal policy optimization algorithms (2017), arXiv:1707.06347 [cs.LG]. [21] S. Levine, Reinforcement learning and control as probabilistic inference: Tutorial and review (2018), arXiv:1805.00909 [cs.LG]. [22] J. Ho, A. Jain, and P. Abbeel, Denoising diffusion proba-bilistic models (2020), arXiv:2006.11239 [cs.LG]. [23] I. J. Goodfellow, J. Pouget-Abadie, M. Mirza, B. Xu, D. Warde-Farley, S. Ozair, A. Courville, and Y. Ben-gio, Generative adversarial nets, in Advances in Neu-ral Information Processing Systems , Vol. 27, edited by Z. Ghahramani, M. Welling, C. Cortes, N. Lawrence, and K. Weinberger (Curran Associates, Inc., 2014). [24] C. Finn, S. Levine, and P. Abbeel, Guided cost learn-ing: Deep inverse optimal control via policy optimization (2016), arXiv:1603.00448 [cs.LG]. [25] D. Reith, M. P¨ utz, and F. M¨ uller-Plathe, Deriving effec-tive mesoscale potentials from atomistic simulations, Jour-nal of Computational Chemistry 24 , 1624–1636 (2003). [26] M. Hanke, Well-posedness of the iterative boltzmann inversion, Journal of Statistical Physics 170 , 536–553 (2017). [27] S. Matin, A. E. A. Allen, J. Smith, N. Lubbers, R. B. Jadrich, R. Messerly, B. Nebgen, Y. W. Li, S. Tretiak, and K. Barros, Machine learning potentials with the iterative boltzmann inversion: Training to experiment (2024). [28] S. Raja, I. Amin, F. Pedregosa, and A. S. Krishnapriyan, Stability-aware training of machine learning force fields with differentiable boltzmann estimators, Transactions on Machine Learning Research (2025). [29] P. Fuchs, S. Thaler, S. R¨ ocken, and J. Zavadlav, chemtrain: Learning deep potential models via automatic differentia-tion and statistical physics (2025). [30] B. Han and K. Yu, Refining potential energy surface through dynamical properties via differentiable molecular simulation (2025). [31] A. S. Gangan, E. D. Cubuk, S. S. Schoenholz, M. Bauchy, and N. A. Krishnan, Force-field optimization by end-to-end differentiable atomistic simulation (2025). [32] S. A. Maddipatla, N. Bojan, M. Bojan, S. Vedula, P. Schanda, A. Marx, and A. Bronstein, Inverse prob-lems with experiment-guided alphafold, in Forty-second International Conference on Machine Learning (2025). [33] C. Kolloff, T. H¨ oppe, E. Angelis, M. J. Schreiner, S. Bauer, A. Dittadi, and S. Olsson, Minimum-excess-work guidance (2025), arXiv:2505.13375 [stat.ML]. [34] R. Raghu, A. Levy, G. Wetzstein, and E. D. Zhong, Multi-scale guidance of protein structure prediction with hetero-geneous cryo-em data (2025), arXiv:2506.04490 [cs.LG]. [35] T. Zarrouk and M. A. Caro, Linear-scaling calculation of experimental observables for molecular augmented dynam-ics simulations (2025), arXiv:2509.22388 [cond-mat.mtrl-sci]. [36] H. M. Berman, J. Westbrook, Z. Feng, G. Gilliland, T. N. Bhat, H. Weissig, I. N. Shindyalov, and P. E. Bourne, The protein data bank, Nucleic Acids Research 

28 , 235 (2000), https://academic.oup.com/nar/article-pdf/28/1/235/9895144/280235.pdf. [37] S. Chmiela, A. Tkatchenko, H. E. Sauceda, I. Poltavsky, K. T. Sch¨ utt, and K.-R. M¨ uller, Machine learn-ing of accurate energy-conserving molecular force fields, Science Advances 3, e1603015 (2017), https://www.science.org/doi/pdf/10.1126/sciadv.1603015. [38] M. Majewski, A. P´ erez, P. Th¨ olke, S. Doerr, N. E. Char-ron, T. Giorgino, B. E. Husic, C. Clementi, F. No´ e, and G. De Fabritiis, Machine learning coarse-grained poten-tials of protein thermodynamics, Nature Communications 

14 , 10.1038/s41467-023-41343-1 (2023). [39] K. Lindorff-Larsen, S. Piana, R. O. Dror, and D. E. Shaw, How fast-folding proteins fold, Science 334 , 517–520 (2011). [40] K. W¨ uthrich, Nmr with proteins and nucleic acids, Euro-physics News 17 , 11–13 (1986). [41] E. D. Zhong, T. Bepler, B. Berger, and J. H. Davis, Cryodrgn: reconstruction of heterogeneous cryo-em struc-tures using neural networks, Nature Methods 18 , 176–185 (2021). [42] A. Vaswani, N. Shazeer, N. Parmar, J. Uszkoreit, L. Jones, A. N. Gomez, L. Kaiser, and I. Polosukhin, Attention is all you need (2023), arXiv:1706.03762 [cs.CL]. [43] D. P. Kingma and J. Ba, Adam: A method for stochastic optimization (2017), arXiv:1412.6980 [cs.LG]. 11 

Appendix A: Experimental Details 

We provide further details on our experiments. Unless otherwise specified, we use a Transformer encoder [ 42 ] for the generative model and an MLP for our discriminators. We apply rotation augmentation in all our experiments. We used Adam [ 43 ] for all of our experiments and normalized both the molecular and observable inputs. We also found that using a gradient penalty to handle the Lipschitz constraint to be more flexible than fixing a spectral norm. We discuss individual experiments below. 

1. Synthetic Mixture-of-Gaussians 

We visualize the synthetic mixture-of-Gaussians benchmark in Figure 5. Although this is a simple distribution in three dimensions, EA struggles to align to the target distribution (see Section IV A and Table V). 

FIG. 5. Synthetic mixture-of-Gaussians benchmark. The base distribution (left) is an isotropic mixture-of-Gaussians with eight components located at the vertices of a cube, with uniform mixture weights. We define the target distribution (right) by perturbing the variances and mixture weights for the Gaussians (for example, larger variance on top-left to bottom-right diagonal). 

a. Dataset Parameters The synthetic benchmark consists of two three-dimensional mixture-of-Gaussians distribu-tions, both with eight components centered at the vertices of a cube with side length 6.0 ˚A. We summarize the key parameters in Table IV. 

TABLE IV. Synthetic mixture-of-Gaussians parameters. Both distributions have eight Gaussian components positioned at the cube vertices {(±3, ±3, ±3) } ˚A. The base distribution is uniform, while the target distribution has heterogeneous variances and mixture weights. 

Parameter Base (Uniform) Target (Reweighted) 

Cube Side Length 6.0 ˚ A 6.0 ˚ ANumber of Components 8 8Component Positions Cube vertices Cube vertices 

Mixture Weights: 

Diagonal Pair 1 0.25 0.40 Diagonal Pair 2 0.25 0.30 Diagonal Pair 3 0.25 0.10 Diagonal Pair 4 0.25 0.20 

Variances (σ2, ˚ A2): Vertex 1: (+3 , +3 , +3) 0.5 0.3 Vertex 2: (+3 , +3 , −3) 0.5 0.5 Vertex 3: (+3 , −3, +3) 0.5 1.0 Vertex 4: (+3 , −3, −3) 0.5 0.4 Vertex 5: ( −3, +3 , +3) 0.5 0.6 Vertex 6: ( −3, +3 , −3) 0.5 1.2 Vertex 7: ( −3, −3, +3) 0.5 0.5 Vertex 8: ( −3, −3, −3) 0.5 0.3 12 

FIG. 6. Comparison of expectation alignment (EA) and ADA across all evaluated observables on the MD17 aspirin system. While EA aligns first-order statistics, ADA more accurately captures higher-order structure, yielding closer agreement with the full target observable distributions. TABLE V. Distributional alignment metrics on mixture of Gaussians. We compare alignment using ADA against EA style approaches using an observable set of 2-dimensional projection maps. Up until the fourth order, moment-based matching is unable to recover the distribution empirically. Method Energy W2 ↓ Cluster KL ↓

Base 1.10 0.12 

ADA (ours) 0.05 0.01 

EA (1st) 1.10 0.12 EA (2nd) 0.90 0.02 EA (3rd) 0.90 0.02 EA (4th) 0.70 0.05 

2. Small Molecules 

In this work, we consider the aspirin system (C 9H8O4) composed of 21 atoms, with DFT data taken from the MD17 dataset [ 37 ]. To characterize the conformational landscape and hydrogen bonding dynamics of aspirin, we compute the following set of observables: 

a. Radius of Gyration The radius of gyration Rg quantifies the spatial extent of the molecular structure and is defined as: 

R2 

> g

= 1

M

> N

X

> i=1

mi∥ri − rCOM ∥2 (A1) where mi and ri are the mass and position of atom i, N = 21 is the total number of atoms, M = PNi=1 mi is the total mass, and rCOM is the center of mass. This observable captures the overall compactness of the molecule, with lower 13 values indicating more compact conformations and higher values indicating more extended structures. Units: ˚ A.

b. Mean Interatomic Distance The mean interatomic distance ⟨d⟩ provides a global measure of the molecular size: 

⟨d⟩ = 2

N (N − 1)  

> N−1

X

> i=1
> N

X

> j=i+1

∥ri − rj ∥ (A2) This quantity averages over all pairwise atomic distances and serves as a complementary measure to Rg , being sensitive to the overall distribution of atoms rather than their distance from the center of mass. Units: ˚ A. 

c. Bond Lengths We monitor all covalent bond lengths dij between bonded atoms i and j:

dij = ∥ri − rj ∥ (A3) These observables track local geometric distortions and vibrational modes within the molecular framework. For aspirin, we focus particularly on the bonds within the carboxylic acid (COOH) and ester functional groups. Units: ˚ A. 

d. Hydrogen Bond Distance The intramolecular hydrogen bond distance dHB is defined as the distance between the hydroxyl hydrogen of the carboxylic acid group and the carbonyl oxygen of the ester group: 

dHB = ∥rH(COOH) − rO(ester) ∥ (A4) This observable is crucial for characterizing the intramolecular hydrogen bonding that stabilizes certain aspirin conformers. Shorter distances indicate stronger hydrogen bonding interactions. Units: ˚ A. 

e. COOH-Ester Distance The COOH-ester distance dCE measures the separation between the center of mass of the carboxylic acid group and the center of mass of the ester group: 

dCE = ∥rCOOH COM − rester COM ∥ (A5) This collective variable captures the relative orientation and proximity of the two functional groups, which is directly related to the molecule’s ability to form the intramolecular hydrogen bond. Units: ˚ A.  

> 3. Free Energy Surfaces

To explore the conformational landscape of aspirin, we compute two-dimensional free energy surfaces (FES) as functions of pairs of these observables: 

• FES A : F (dHB , R 2 

> g

) – This surface relates hydrogen bonding strength to molecular compactness, revealing how intramolecular hydrogen bonds affect the overall molecular geometry. 

• FES B : F (dCE , d HB ) – This surface directly connects the functional group separation to the hydrogen bond distance, capturing the geometric requirements for hydrogen bond formation. 

• FES C : F (ξ1, ξ 2) – This surface explores the functional group geometry using appropriate collective variables that characterize the relative orientation and configuration of the COOH and ester moieties. We take the Jensen-Shannon divergence of the free energy surfaces by a standard binning procedure of the 2-dimensional distributions.  

> 4. Proteins

In this work, we considered two proteins: Trp-Cage and BBL with 20 and 47 amino acids, respectively. We used the same experimental structures, derived by NMR, used by Majewski et al. [38] with the following PDB IDs: 2JOF for Trp-cage (29 structures) and 2WXC for BBL (21 structures). We first pre-trained the base model using 100,000 samples of each of the proteins obtained by running MD simulations with a classical force field [ 38 ]. We then used ADA individually on each protein to match the experimental distribution of structures by using cryo-EM images as observables. We note that the simulation data was coarse-grained using the alpha-carbon [ 38 ], so we applied the same alpha-carbon coarse-graining to the experimental data. We simulate the cryo-EM images to provide precise control over the image formation, allowing us to evaluate ADA’s robustness to noise. We build off the code provided by Zhong et al. [41] to generate 128 × 128 cryo-EM images. We use a standard deviation of 2 .5 for the Gaussian kernels for volume generation, an amplitude of 0 .1, a defocus between 0 .814 

FIG. 7. Example cryo-EM images of Trp-cage used by ADA to align with the experimental distribution of protein structures. 

TABLE VI. Experiment Hyperparameters. Note that discriminator steps refers to the number of gradient steps taken between each update of the generative model, and the discriminator weight refers to the weighting of the discriminator term relative to the KL term in the generative model update step. 

Value Hyperparameter Synthetic Small Molecules Proteins Base Model: 

Layers MLP(512, 512, 512, 512) 8 8Heads N/A 12 12 Hidden Dimension N/A 384 384 Number of Euler Steps (sampling) N/A 45 35 

Discriminator Model: 

Hidden Dimension 512 512 (CNN, see A 4) Layers 2 2 (CNN, see A 4) 

ADA: 

Discriminator Weight 128.0 4096.0 512 Discriminator Steps 1 1 3Gradient Penalty Weight 1000 1000 1 × 10 6

Training: 

Generative Model LR (Pre-training, fine-tuning) 1 × 10 −3, 1 × 10 −5 1 × 10 −3, 1 × 10 −5 1 × 10 −3, 1 × 10 −5

Discriminator LR 1 × 10 −3 1 × 10 −3 1 × 10 −3

Weight Decay (Pre-training, fine-tuning) 1 × 10 −4, 1 × 10 −8 1 × 10 −4, 1 × 10 −8 1 × 10 −4, 1 × 10 −8

# Gradient Steps (Pre-training, fine-tuning) 10,000, 10,000 500,000, 10,000 300,000, 1,000 Batch Size 1024 64 128 

and 2 .5 μm , a b-factor between 1 and 100 ˚A, and a pixel size of 0 .3 ˚A. We also run experiments with a signal-to-noise ratio (SNR) of 1 .0 and 0 .1. We generate a new cryo-EM image each batch, mimicking a real cryo-EM imaging setup where there might be multiple different images of similar underlying structures. See Figure 7 for example images. Note that for this experiment, we use a convolutional neural network (CNN) for the discriminator. The convolutional encoder consists of 3 convolutional blocks, each containing a convolution (kernel size 3, padding 1) and max pooling (stride 2). The channels are 1 , 32 , 64 , 128. An adaptive average pooling layer reduces spatial dimensions to a fixed size of 2 × 2, followed by a linear projection. We report further hyperparameters in Table VI. 

5. Computational Resources 

All experiments were run on a single GPU. We used both A6000s and H100s to run our experiments. Training the base models and applying ADA took less than 24 GPU hours across all of our experiments. Interestingly, performance 15 kept improving with ADA as the models kept training longer, especially with more observables and more complicated systems. This suggests that ADA could benefit and take advantage of further computation on larger experimental datasets. 

> Appendix B: Proofs

We provide the full proofs of the theorems presented in the main text.  

> 1. Proof of Theorem B.1

Theorem B.1 (Existence and uniqueness of the saddle point) . Assume X is a compact Polish space and that μbase 

has full support on X. Additionally, allow o(i) to be continuous for i ∈ I. For any β ∈ R, Equation (6) admits a saddle point (μ∗, (f (i))∗), where μ∗ is unique. Consequently, the recovered distribution is well defined. We denote this solution by μ∗ ∈ sol L β.Proof. The proof is straightforward Sion’s theorem. We start by showing that the space of probability measures is compact with respect to the weak* topology. We then note that Lipschitz functions are a convex subset of the continuous functions, equipped with the supremum norm. With this, both our probability measures (generators) and functions (discriminators) live on convex subsets of linear topological vectors spaces. We then use basic facts about the continuity of our Lagrangian to justify the existence of a unique saddle point μ∗.We first equip the space of probability measures with the weak* topology; allowing μ 7 → ⟨ μ, f ⟩ = R f dμ : P → R to be continuous; resulting in P1 being a compact convex subset of a linear topological vector space with respect to the weak* topology. 

Let P = M(X) denote the space of Radon measures on ( X, F), and let P1 ⊂ P be the subset of probability measures. Allow C0(X) to be the set of continuous functions on X vanishing at infinity. As X is compact we have that 

C0(X) = C(X); the set of all continuous functions. We equip P with the weak* topology induced by C(X)∗, i.e., the coarsest topology such that for all f ∈ C(X), 

μ 7 → ⟨ μ, f ⟩ := 

Z

f dμ, 

is continuous. We have that P is a linear topological vector space, and P1 is a convex subset of P.We note that probability measures are known to be compact with respect to the weak*. C0(X) is a Banach space, thus the closed TV unit ball B1 = {μ : ∥μ∥T V ≤ 1} is compact in weak*. As probability measures are closed in weak*, and P1 ⊂ B1 we get compactness of P1 in weak*. 

We further define the set of our rewards Fm such that it is a convex subset of a linear topological vector space. 

Allow f (i) ∈ LIP 1(Oi) : O(i) → R to be the discriminator associated with observable i. By considering the set of continuous functions C(O(i)) under the supremum norm, we find that Fi ⊂ C(O(i)) is a convex subset of a linear topological vector space. In our setup, we consider a vector of finite discriminators, one per observable. We denote this by: Fm = Q 

> i∈I

(Fi), which is additionally a convex subspace of Q 

> i∈I

C(O(i)). Thus Fm ⊂ Q 

> i∈I

C(O(i)) is a convex subset linear topological vector space. 

We now finish, by showing that we can invoke Sion’s theorem using the compactness of P1 , yielding the existence of a saddle point which is unique in μ∗.

The Lagrangian is given by 

L(μ, (f (i))) = β X

> i∈I

Eo(i)# (( μ−ν)) [f (i)] − DKL (μ∥μbase ).

First, we demonstrate that μ 7 → L (μ, (f (i))) is upper semi-continuous in μ, and strictly concave. 

The term −DKL (μ∥μbase ) is upper semi-continuous in the weak* topology and strictly concave in μ.Likewise, for fixed ( f (i)), the mapping μ 7 → P 

> i∈I

Eo(i)# (( μ−ν)) [f (i)] is continuous in the weak* topology, as we have a finite sum of continuous functions. 

Next, we demonstrate that (f (i)) 7 → L (μ, (f (i))) is lower semi-continuous in (f (i)), and convex. 16 For fixed ( μ − ν): (f (i)) 7 → X

> i∈I

Eo(i)# (μ−ν)[f (i)]is continuous on Fm with respect to the product topology. This is because πi : ( f (i)) 7 → f (i) is continuous and integration with respect to a finite measure f (i) 7 → ⟨ γ, f (i)⟩ is continuous, making P 

> i∈I

Eo(i)# (( μ−ν)) [f (i)] = [ P 

> i∈I

⟨o(i)# (( μ − ν)) , π i(·)⟩]( f (i)) continuous in ( f (i)). Hence, we achieve lower semi-continuity in ( f (i)) trivially. Convexity comes naturally from linearity. 

We now invoke Sion’s theorem, as we have proved the constituent lemmas. 

Therefore, L is concave and upper semi-continuous in μ, and convex and lower semi-continuous in ( f (i)). Sion’s theorem applies, yielding max  

> μ

inf  

> (f(i))

L(μ, (f (i))) = inf  

> (f(i))

max  

> μ

L(μ, (f (i))) .

As P1 is compact, we get attainment of a maximizer μ∗. Uniqueness of μ∗ follows from the strict concavity of 

−DKL (μ∥μbase ) in μ.

2. Asymptotic Convergence in Wasserstein 

Theorem B.2 (Asymptotic convergence in Wasserstein) . Assume DKL (ν∥μbase ) < ∞. Let (μ∗ 

> β

, (f (i) 

> β

)∗) ∈ sol L β

for β ∈ R+. Then, as β → ∞ , we have 

d(i)(μ∗ 

> β

, ν ) → 0 for all i ∈ I. 

Proof. As DKL (ν∥μbase ) < ∞ there exists a constant B ∈ R such that 

DKL (ν∥μbase ) ≤ B. 

Since ν is feasible for the maximization problem, optimality of μ∗ 

> β

implies 

L(μ∗ 

> β

, (f (i) 

> β

)∗; β) ≥ L (ν, (f (i) 

> β

)∗; β)= −DKL (ν∥μbase ) ≥ − B. (B1) On the other hand, by definition of the saddle point, 

L(μ∗ 

> β

, (f (i) 

> β

)∗; β) = −DKL (μ∗ 

> β

∥μbase ) − β X

> i∈I

d(i)(μ∗ 

> β

, ν )

≤ − β X

> i∈I

d(i)(μ∗ 

> β

, ν ), (B2) since the KL term is nonnegative. Combining the two inequalities yields 

β X

> i∈I

d(i)(μ∗ 

> β

, ν ) ≤ B. 

In particular, for each i ∈ I,

d(i)(μ∗ 

> β

, ν ) ≤ Bβ ,

which implies 

d(i)(μ∗ 

> β

, ν ) → 0 as β → ∞ .17 

3. Weak Limit Converges in Constraint Set 

Theorem B.3 (Asymptotic convergence to the constraint set) . Let (μ∗ 

> β

)β> 0 be the sequence of saddle-point solutions from Theorem B.2. Suppose that d(i)(μ∗ 

> β

, ν ) → 0 for all i ∈ I. Then any weak limit point ¯μ of (μ∗ 

> β

) satisfies 

(o(i))# ¯μ = ( o(i))#ν for all i ∈ I, 

that is, ¯μ ∈ M o.Proof. Since d(i)(μ∗ 

> β

, ν ) → 0, we have 

W1

 (o(i))#μ∗ 

> β

, (o(i))#ν → 0for each i. Because W1 metrizes weak convergence on probability measures over Polish spaces with finite first moment, it follows that (o(i))#μ∗ 

> β

⇒ (o(i))#ν. 

By continuity of pushforward under weak convergence, any weak limit point ¯μ therefore satisfies ( o(i))# ¯μ = ( o(i))#ν

for all i, completing the proof.