Title: HMB-GAN: Hybrid Multi-Bézier GAN for Vector Shape Synthesis

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2609.21158v1

Published Time: Mon, 21 Sep 2026 00:20:02 GMT

Number of Pages: 7

Markdown Content:
HMB-GAN: Hybrid Multi-Bézier GAN for Vector 

# Shape Synthesis 

Elian Hugh Thiele-Evans  , Binh Duong Pham  ,

Hani Omar M Alharbi, Liibaan Aaden, Syed Umer 

Hasnain Zaidi, and Prem Prakash Jayaraman 

School of Science, Computing and Emerging Technologies 

Swinburne University of Technology 

Melbourne, Australia 

elianhte@gmail.com 

Muhammad Saeed  , and Boris Eisenbart 

School of Engineering, and School of Design and 

Architecture 

Swinburne University of Technology 

Melbourne, Australia 

Abstract —We explore the use of hybrid quantum-classical gen -

erative adversarial networks for synthesising CAD-ready vector 

geometries. Unlike prior work that operates in rasterised or 

single-Bézier domains, we introduce HMB-GAN (Hybrid Multi-

Bézier GAN), an end-to-end differentiable generative framework 

that constructs closed shapes through stitched multi-segment 

Bézier representations with geometric continuity enforced by 

construction. We compare a quantum-enhanced generator with 

a classical generator within this architecture and evaluate them 

across point cloud distribution metrics and geometric shape sta -

tistics. Results show that despite faster convergence, a reduction 

in model parameter count, and slightly improved performance 

on point cloud metrics, the quantum generator suffers from 

excessive simulator overhead and thus classically-simulated eval -

uation suffers from hardware constraints. These results demon -

strate the feasibility of modelling structured geometries through 

hybrid quantum architectures whilst highlighting contemporary 

hardware limitations. 

Index Terms —Quantum Machine Learning, Computer-As -

sisted Design, Generative Adversarial Networks, Point Cloud 

Generation, Parametric Bézier Representations 

1 Introduction 

In modern computer-assisted design (CAD), parametric 

curves are often used in the construction of objects such as 

airfoils, part boundaries, and hardware components. Indeed, 

these curves provide precise, editable geometries which can 

be optimised for specific structural properties such as aerody -

namics, stress tolerance, and flexion. 

Relatedly, GANs have demonstrated strong potential for 

shape generation, reconstruction, and manipulation. Research 

into GANs for point clouds and 3D meshes has shown that 

adversarial learning can capture spatial dependencies without 

relying on explicit parametric surfaces  [1] . Similarly, in 2D 

and CAD design, models based on Bézier curves have been 

used to represent complex forms compactly while maintaining 

mathematical smoothness and structural coherence  [2] . Inte -

grating Bézier-based geometric representations within GAN 

frameworks allows the generator to produce continuous, ed -

itable design outputs. This is an advantage over pixel-based 

synthesis for engineering and design applications. 

More recently, the emergence of quantum and hybrid 

quantum-classical GANs has introduced new opportunities 

for generative modelling. Quantum GANs (QGANs) utilise 

variational quantum circuits as generators, leveraging quan -

tum superposition and entanglement to represent probability 

distributions that may be intractable for classical networks 

[3] . Hybrid architectures combine quantum generators with 

classical discriminators to improve expressivity in modelling 

while keeping the whole system computationally practical. 

These approaches have shown early promise in tasks involving 

limited or complex datasets, where quantum embeddings may 

enhance sample diversity and generalisation  [4] .

Nevertheless, challenges remain in applying GANs to geo -

metric domains. Standard GAN architectures are primarily 

designed for grid-based data such as images, whereas Bézier 

curves and 3D point clouds do not fit neatly into a grid. 

While QGANs offer theoretical advantages, their practical 

integration into hybrid systems for design geometry is still 

underexplored. 

This research therefore seeks to address this gap by 

developing a hybrid quantum-classical generative adversarial 

framework for synthesising geometric data using Bézier-based 

representations. Building upon the foundational GAN archi -

tecture introduced by  [5]  and the recent advancements in 

quantum variational circuits, this study aims to explore the 

impact quantum feature encoding may have within adversarial 

learning on geometric diversity, and stability. 

The main contributions of this paper are as follows: 

1)  Exploration of small-scale quantum generator feasi -

bility on classical hardware, highlighting simulation 

constraints and GAN convergence implications. 

2)  An end-to-end differentiable GAN architecture that 

constructs closed, multi-segment Bézier curves in vec -

tor space, without relying on rasterisation or symbolic 

primitives. 

3)  A Bézier decoder that creates CAD-ready shapes via 

geometric stitching constraints, which enforces conti -

nuity and closure across segments. 

2 Related Work 

Existing work on geometric modelling and vector graphic 

synthesis can broadly be categorised into three approaches: 

rasterisation-based models, sequence-based SVG generation 

1© 2026 IEEE. Personal use of this material is permitted. Permission from IEEE must be obtained for all other uses, in any current or future media, including reprinting/republishing this material for advertising or promotional purposes, creating new collective works, for resale or redistribution to servers or lists, or reuse of any copyrighted component of this work in other works. Published in 2026 IEEE International Conference on Quantum Software (QSW). DOI: 10.1109/QSW72780.2026.00033 models, and parametric curve representations. Differentiable 

rasterisation methods (e.g. DiffVG  [6] ) are potent, but they 

indirectly  optimise vector graphics, which can make them 

poorly suited for tasks that require structured and consistent 

geometries, and do not naturally enforce closure or continuity. 

Sequence-based models operate directly on SVG parameters 

(e.g. DeepSVG, SketchRNN  [7] , [8] ), but do not have clo -

sure or geometric continuity guarantees, and do not have 

per-segment-level correspondence across samples. Existing 

parametric approaches to generating geometries model para -

meters directly in latent space, but are limited in that they can 

only represent single-segment shapes (e.g. BézierGAN  [9] )

and therefore are not directly extensible to a structured multi-

segment shape setting. 

Thus, there remains a gap in generative modelling frame -

works that can produce structurally coherent, complex two-

dimensional CAD-ready geometries. 

3 Methods 

3.1  Proposed Framework 

HMB-GAN is composed of three components: (1) a hybrid 

quantum generator utilising VQCs, (2) a structured multi-

segment Bézier decoder that outputs closed vector shapes, 

and (3) a PointNet discriminator that operates over point 

clouds.  Figure 1  displays the overall GAN architecture for the 

framework. 

Random latent vectors are passed through the generator, and 

transformed into higher-dimensional latents, either through 

non-linear mapping (classical comparison), or through multi -

variate feature encoding through VQCs. A decoder maps 

the higher-dimensional latent vectors into structured Bézier 

segments, which are sampled into point clouds and subse -

quently classified by the discriminator. Gradients from the 

discriminator backpropagate through the decoder and gener -

ator, encouraging more realistic shapes. 

> Figure 1. Quantum Training Pipeline

3.2  Quantum Generator 

The quantum generator encodes latent codes  𝑧  into quan -

tum states for consumption by variational quantum circuits 

(VQCs). The noise is transformed into forms that capture 

the mechanics of the empirical data distribution. To promote 

smooth transformations and stable gradients, the generator 

uses scaled-residual skip connections  [10] . Given the classic 

instability of adversarial training, incremental learnable devi -

ations help stabilise the min-max game, whereas by contrast, 

feature reparameterisations can be volatile. 

Quantum  𝒢︀  encodes latent variables into qubits, and applies 

parameterised RZ, RY, RY rotations to enrich the feature 

space. A CZ entanglement gate is applied to allow neigh -

bouring qubits to capture non-linear dependencies. The final 

result is converted back into a classical form for ingestion by 

the next layer of the generator. 

The quantum  𝒢︀  is defined by the recursive structure and 

quantum parameterisation given in  (1) ,

ℎ0 = LN (𝑊 0𝑧 ), ℎ𝑘 +1 = ℎ𝑘  + 𝛼 𝑄 𝑘 (ℎ𝑘 ;𝜃 𝑘 ), 𝑘  = 0..3 (1) 

where  𝜃 𝑘  represents the trainable rotation parameters and 

entanglement gate angles of the VQC, and alpha is a fixed 

scaling factor for residual magnitude. 

Subsequently, parameterised rotations and entangling layers 

are applied. The current circuit uses data-reuploading  [11] 

to re-encode  𝑥  before each variational layer, capturing richer 

relationships between latent dimensions with fewer qubits, and 

improving gradient flow. The circuit parameter  𝜃  is initialised 

near zero, to stabilise early training of the GAN. 

The final output is computed as  (2) 𝒢︀ 

(𝑧 ) = 𝑊 out ℎ4 (2) 

Thus, features from  𝒢︀  are passed directly to the decoder to 

extract latent Bézier representations. 

3.3  Decoder 

Dc is formulated as a shallow network with two heads, one 

that expands generator features into Bézier space, and another 

that uses generator features to control the curvature of the 

Bézier handles. 

To achieve geometric closure, Dc stitches the segments so 

that the final  𝑃  3 point is equal to the first segment’s  𝑃  0

point in Cartesian space. Moreover, to ensure  𝐶 0 continuity, 

segments are stitched to ensure each segment’s  𝑃  3 point is 

shared with the subsequent segment’s  𝑃  0. In practice, this 

means that the resulting tensor indices are strided. As with 

previous research into shape generation  [8] , we have found 

that using a mean-centred cumulative sum of control points 

imparts a strong geometric continuity prior. Using control 

point deltas (as opposed to absolute coordinates) allows the 

network to focus on Bézier transformations rather than detan -

gling the segments at initialisation. 

Dc is composed of an MLP with a fully connected layer, 

layer normalisation, SiLU activation and a final fully con -

nected layer that outputs Bézier segments. To handle learned 

curvature, a second MLP includes two fully connected layers 

with a SiLU activation, with weights initialised to produce 

smooth curves at the onset. The positional logits of the curva -

ture head are passed through sigmoid activations (denoting 

how far along the chord the control point is), and the curva -

ture deviation logit is passed through a tanh activation (how 

strongly the Bézier handle deviates from the chord). Cyclical 

encodings of segments are used as positional encodings that 

impart a smooth connectivity prior between segments. Finally, 

the stitched tensor is per-sample bounding box normalised 

[−1, +1] to match downstream shape expectations. 

We define a vector decoder in  (3)  as 

Dc  : ℝ𝑑 ℎ → ℝ𝑆 ∗4∗2, (3) 

2with stitching enforced as defined in  (4) :

𝑐 𝑖  = 𝑃  𝑖 +1 

> 0

− 𝑃  𝑖  

> 0

, 𝑃  𝑖  

> 3

= 𝑃  𝑖  

> 0

+ 𝑐 𝑖 , 𝑃  𝑆  

> 3

= 𝑃  1 

> 0

(4) 

and curvature parameterised as in  (5) :

𝐶 𝑖  

> 𝑘

= 𝑃  𝑖  

> 0

+ 𝜎 (𝑠 𝑘 ,𝑖 )𝑐 𝑖  + tanh (𝛿 𝑘 ,𝑖 )𝑛 𝑖 , 𝑘  ∈ {1, 2}, (5) 

where segment position  𝑠  is encoded as in  (6) 

𝑒 𝑠  = [cos (2𝜋  𝑠 

𝑛 𝑘 ), sin (2𝜋  𝑠 

𝑛 𝑘 )]

> 𝐾
> 𝑘 =1

(6) 

where  𝑛  is the total number of Bézier segments and  𝐾  is 

the number of harmonic components. 

Unlike single-curve parametric models  [9] , our model rep -

resents each shape as a fixed set of  𝑁  > 1 stitched Bézier 

segments. This preserves per-segment correspondence across 

samples, whilst combining cumulative stroke generation  [8] 

with learned Bézier handle parameterisations  [9] .

Through gradients provided by the discriminator,  Dc  helps 

guide the Bézier segments composed by  𝒢︀  .

3.4  Discriminator 

The discriminator is formulated in the DeepSets/PointNet 

[12] , [13]  style, wherein set data features are extracted, before 

pooling through a cardinality invariant operation (e.g. mean, 

max, or log-sum-exp), and finally features are further extracted 

to emphasise set-to-set differences. During training, the order 

of points within each set is randomly permuted to prevent 

accidental reliance on set ordering. 

To promote scale invariance and translation invariance, 

we introduce a set normalisation module (“SetNorm”). The 

intended outcome is to allow the discriminator to focus on 

geometric cues rather than the more superficial scale and 

translation cues that carry louder signals. Concretely, SetNorm 

centres and rescales point clouds to unit RMS magnitude, 

followed by a learned affine bias and gain (analogous to 

LayerNorm or BatchNorm). As signal is lost from the removal 

of these cues, the affine transformation acts as a learned 

magnitude amplification. Formally, the SetNorm operation 

normalises each point cloud as defined in  (7) ̃

𝑥  = 𝑥  − 𝑥 , 𝑦  =̃ 𝑥 

√̃𝑥 2 + 𝜀 

𝛾  + 𝛽  (7) 

where  ̃  𝑥  is the point cloud centroid and  ̃  𝑥 2 denotes the 

mean squared magnitude across points and coordinates. 

The discriminator consists of the SetNorm module, three 

spectrally normalised fully-connected layers and leaky ReLU 

activations. As per  [14] , mix pooling is used via concatena -

tion of mean and max values of the feature tensor. Finally, 

following layer normalisation, two fully-connected layers and 

a leaky ReLU activation downsample to a single logit repre -

senting real and fake probabilities. 

Unlike PointNet, and other DeepSet style discriminators, 

we apply spectral normalisation to all the linear layers in the 

discriminator to stabilise training via a 1-Lipschitz constraint 

under the SN-GAN formulation  [15] . Gradients from D are 

backpropagated through the vector decoder and generator, 

promoting more realistic shapes. 

3.5  Loss Architecture 

Our goal is to learn a mapping of latent representation  𝑧  to 

output  𝑥  that captures both the statistical distribution of real 

samples, as well as their geometric fidelity. To this end, our 

network incorporates three types of losses: 

1)  adversarial losses, operationalised as adaptive-margin 

hinge loss  [16] 

2)  auxiliary losses, including feature matching  [17]  and 

mode-seeking loss  [18] 

3)  geometric regularisation losses, consisting of Cham -

fer distance  [19] , quantile-based shoelace-area penalty 

[20] , [21] , and  𝐺 1 continuity penalty loss 

The discriminator is trained with the corresponding adap -

tive-margin hinge objective only. 

𝐺 1 continuity promotes tangent direction matching across 

segment joins. This discourages oscillatory segments, as the 

network is rewarded for producing smooth curvatures. We 

define the  𝐺 1 loss term as  (8) :

ℓ𝐺 1 = 1

𝐽  ∑

> 𝐽
> 𝑗 =1

(1 − 𝑣 (𝑗 ) 

> 1

⋅ 𝑣 (𝑗 )

> 2

‖𝑣 (𝑗 ) 

> 1

‖‖𝑣 (𝑗 ) 

> 2

‖) (8) 

The shoelace area loss  (9) , derived from Greene’s theorem 

[20] , [21] , penalises synthetic Béziers whose unsigned area 

falls below the 10th percentile of empirical area sizes. This 

discourages degenerate shapes such as hairpin chords or back-

looped geometries. Though the 10th percentile cutoff is a 

heuristic, it was empirically chosen so as to not punish shapes 

that are feasibly small. The shoelace loss term is expressed 

as the following: 

ℓarea  = 𝔼 fake [max (0,𝜏 𝑞 −1     

> 2|∮𝑐 (𝑥 dy −𝑦 dx )|)]

, (9) 

where  𝜏 𝑞  denotes the quantile of the unsigned areas of real 

samples. 

The full objective for  𝒢︀  is defined through three loss com -

ponents: auxiliary loss  (10) , geometric loss  (11) , and the final 

generator objective  (12) , where the auxiliary and geometric 

losses are weighted accordingly: 

ℓaux  = 𝜆 FM ℓFM  + 𝜆 MS ℓMS  (10) 

ℓgeo  = 𝜆 CH ℓCH  + 𝜆 CH 

10 ℓarea  + 𝜆 CH 

10 ℓ𝐺 1 (11) 

ℓfull  = ℓ𝒢︀  + ℓaux  + ℓgeo  (12) 

Here,  ℓ𝒢︀  denotes the generator adversarial term,  ℓFM  and 

ℓMS  denote feature-matching and mode-seeking losses, and 

ℓCH , ℓarea  and  ℓ𝐺 1 denote the Chamfer, shoelace-area, and 

tangent-continuity terms respectively. 

3.6  Training 

Training follows the SN-GAN approach with AMP and 

EMA stabilisation  [15] . Hyperparameters were chosen using 

TPE-based Bayesian optimisation  [22]  against 1-Nearest 

Neighbour Accuracy (1-NNA) scores. Final model evaluation 

is reported across distribution metrics to ensure improvements 

are not due to over-optimisation of a single metric. 

34 Evaluation 

4.1  Dataset 

The current dataset is the SketchGraphs dataset  [23]  col -

lated by Princeton University. It is a collection of 15 million 

sketches extracted from real-world CAD models coupled with 

an open-source data processing pipeline. 

Sketches are then converted to SVGs via node traversal, 

with an additional constraint that only single-stroke shapes 

with fully closed paths are retained. The point clouds are 

extracted from each SVG and canonicalised through centering, 

normalisation, and PCA-based rotation to the primary axis, 

followed by uniform arc-length resampling to 256 points. The 

arc resampling step ensures an equal distribution of points 

across any given shape, avoiding density biases where shorter 

segments may receive disproportionately higher points. 

4.2  Evaluation Metrics 

We evaluate point cloud distribution metrics and shape 

metrics to provide analysis of geometric quality, mode cover -

age, and shape validity. We evaluate distributional similarity 

via Chamfer-based minimum matching distance (MMD), cov -

erage (COV), and 1-Nearest Neighbour Accuracy (1-NNA), 

as described by PointFlow  [24] . Lower MMD scores indicate 

geometric similarity between sets, higher COV indicates better 

mode coverage, and 1-NNA scores closer to 50% indicate less 

separability between real and synthetic samples. 

To assess shape validity, we also report enclosed area,  𝐺 1

angle, self-intersection rate, and closure error. 

4.3  Baseline and Comparative Setup 

To examine our generative framework, we compare the 

quantum GAN with a classical version wherein the generator 

residual mappings are implemented using fully connected 

layers instead of VQCs. All training dynamics are otherwise 

identical, including GAN architectural structure, number of 

layers, and so on. 

Our architecture introduces a generative framework for 

multi-Bézier parametric shapes with structured geometric 

continuity and closure. To our knowledge, few existing gener -

ative architectures produce such shapes end-to-end in vector 

space with built-in geometric constraints. In order to use ex -

isting models for comparison, such as point cloud GANs, the 

training pipeline would need restructuring to be compatible, 

and would not be a fair comparison. Consequently, suitable 

architectural baselines are difficult to construct. To contextu -

alise GAN performance, we evaluate via two methods: 

(1)  A baseline upper-bound on distribution metrics via 

repeated random splitting and subsequent evaluations 

of the test set ( 𝑁  = 10). 

(2)  ablations of the GAN architecture which isolate the 

contributions of adversarial, auxiliary, and geometric 

losses. 

4.4  Experimental Setup 

In order to estimate the inter-run variability of model 

results, experiments are conducted across three independent 

training runs using random seeds, for a total of six runs 

between the quantum and classical models. As adversarial 

training is largely stochastic, evaluations across multiple inde -

pendent runs allow us to estimate the variance in the training 

itself. 

To estimate the inter-data variability across evaluations, we 

perform bootstrapped evaluations of MMD and COV ( 𝑁  =

500) for each training run. As 1-NNA is sampling dependent 

on the dataset split, bootstrap sampling is not appropriate. In -

stead, we opt for Monte-Carlo subsampling, with a subsample 

fraction of  0.9. As a result, 95% intervals for 1-NNA represent 

sub-sample variability rather than evaluation set variability. 

The dataset uses a standard train-validation-test split of 

60/20/20. We use a multilabel stratified shuffle split using 

approximate pseudolabels derived from point-cloud similarity 

metrics. These labels are used only to encourage a balanced 

distribution of shape classes, and not for evaluation labels. 

The validation set is used to monitor training diagnostics. All 

reported metrics, however, are computed against the test set 

exclusively. 

All training runs occur for 1000 epochs under identical 

training regimes and hyperparameters, barring the differences 

in the quantum and classical generator implementations. 

5 Results and Discussion 

5.1  Distribution and Shape Validity Analysis 

As with prior research in the point cloud domain, the 

metrics proposed by  [24]  are used to evaluate the synthetic 

generator samples. Through these point cloud metrics, we 

can assess whether the quantum model produces synthetic 

distributions that are comparable or better (in the context 

of mode coverage, geometric fidelity, and separability) than 

the classical baseline. Furthermore, these metrics allow us to 

appraise whether the framework is successfully modelling the 

data distribution of the training dataset, and thereby capable 

of synthesising detailed, diverse, and geometrically realistic 

two-dimensional shapes. We additionally examine model size 

and parameter count to compare the computational efficiency 

of the classical and quantum generators.  Table I  explores the 

distribution metrics for the model, computed on a held-out 

test set. 

Both generators were able to achieve favourable metrics, 

with the quantum generator marginally outperforming the 

classical variant on all three point cloud measures. Moreover, 

the quantum generator had a marked reduction in parame -

ter count (1,847,386) in comparison to the classical model 

(3,944,394). Interestingly, both models, whilst attaining worse 

coverage than the null model, were able to achieve a lower 

MMD score than baseline. 

In addition to distribution similarity, we also examine 

the geometric validity of the synthetic shapes. Assessing 

the geometric validity of the synthetic shapes is important 

(e.g. self-intersections, geometric closure), as the framework 

is intended for CAD use cases that depend on structural guar -

antees. Moreover, we seek to analyse whether the quantum 

model accurately produces valid shapes when compared to the 

classical baseline.  Table II  presents the shape validity metrics 

for the trained models and training set. 

4TABLE I                                                                

> Distribution Similarity
> Model # Parameter MMD (↓) COV (%, ↑) 1-NNA (%, ↓)
> Classical 3.94M0.064±0.00
> [0.07−0.07]
> 50.57±0.40
> [49.05−52.59]
> 65.9±0.8
> (57.5−58.7)
> Quantum 𝟏.𝟖𝟓𝐌 𝟎 .𝟎 𝟓 𝟗 ±0.00
> [0.06−0.07]
> 𝟓 𝟎 .𝟗 𝟔 ±1.18
> [50.11−53.51]
> 𝟔 𝟑 .𝟐 ±2.4
> (55.54−56.7)
> Training
> Set -0.064±0.00𝟓 𝟔 .𝟐 𝟐 ±0.80-
> All metrics reported as mean ± standard deviation across 3 independent training runs. Best score is bolded. Brackets
> denote 95% confidence intervals via bootstrapping for MMD and COV. Parentheses denote 95% intervals obtained
> via Monte-Carlo subsampling for 1-NNA.
> TABLE II
> Shape Validity Metrics
> Model Area G¹ Angle
> (°, ↓)
> Self-Inter -
> section
> (%, ↓)
> Closure
> Error (↓)
> Classical 0.940±
> 0.083
> 48.58±
> 1.78
> 41.51±
> 2.150.00±0.00
> Quantum 0.639±
> 0.029
> 49.23±
> 5.75
> 𝟑 𝟕 .𝟗 𝟔 ±
> 5.280.00±0.00
> Training Set 1.480±
> 0.880
> 72.35±
> 42.768.870.01±0.13
> All metrics reported as mean ± standard deviation across 3 independent
> training runs. Best score is bolded.

Both GAN variants present zero closure error, as shapes are 

constructed as closed stitched Bézier segments. The quantum 

generator exhibited fewer shapes with self-intersecting curves 

in comparison to the classical generator. Both models achieved 

comparable smoothness across generated curves. However, 

the test set exhibits higher variability across both area and 

smoothness metrics in comparison to the generative models, 

indicating that the generators tended to produce more regu -

larised geometries. 

Improved performance from the quantum variant may not 

stem purely from inherent quantum expressivity and more so 

from the capture of multivariate correlations. The flat MLP 

approach of the classical generator relies on learning correla -

tions as an emergent property, whereas the quantum generator 

implicitly encodes multivariate relationships. Therefore, the 

advantage of the quantum approach may be better structured 

as the advantage of a multivariate inductive bias rather than 

purely quantum computation. 

(a) Classical Shape Outputs  (b) Quantum Shape Outputs 

> Figure 2. Classical and Quantum Shape Outputs

The quantum synthetic shapes exhibit earlier complexity 

than their classical counterparts; the quantum samples pro -

vided more visually interesting shapes. This notably occurs at 

epoch 500 compared to the classical epoch 1000, representing 

faster convergence on the quantum generator’s part. 

5.2  Failure Modes 

Symmetry appears to be a particularly difficult shape de -

scriptor to emulate, likely because it requires precise control 

over all Béziers to produce mirrored structures. Overall, this 

suggests that though local curvature was learned by the 

network, global structure was difficult to capture. Although 

we see evidence of global structure learned later in training 

(e.g. early signs of symmetry), further training risks collapse 

as well as diminishing returns in the adversarial game. 

Indeed, the network exhibits difficulty in capturing the 

broader distribution of shapes. However, it is inaccurate to 

state that this purely due to the GAN’s lack of representational 

capacity. As per  Table I , the null model’s upper-bound on 

coverage is 56.2%, where by comparison the classical model 

achieved 50.6%. Thus, limitations in mode capture are equally 

likely to be the result of dataset limitations. 

5.3  Training Efficiency and Stability 

On an HPC NVIDIA A100 node, the classical GAN ran 

for approximately 1.12 minutes per epoch. By comparison, 

the quantum variant on the GPU was unacceptably slow at 87 

minutes per epoch, and 3.54 minutes per epoch on CPU. 

5The classical GAN ran with moderate RAM usage and low 

CPU and GPU usage. This is likely due to the GAN archi -

tecture relying on many small kernels (such as the geometric 

reconstructive terms), as well as being limited by smaller 

batch sizes. Whilst larger batch sizes were feasible for the 

GPU (and indeed upwards of 1024-sized batches could easily 

fit in memory), the result was overly smoothed gradients and 

homogeneous shapes. 

The quantum CPU variant used lower RAM and higher 

CPU usage than the classical run, consistent with the loss 

of GPU compute. Overall, the compute resources show that 

the quantum generator runs much faster on CPU with the 

PennyLane simulator. 

This drastic difference in computation times between quan -

tum GPU and CPU is likely due to the PennyLane simulator 

prioritising parallel computations of observables (e.g. >20 

Qubits exhibiting superior GPU performance  [25] ), over par -

allel broadcasting over batches  [26] . This would also explain 

the disparity between classical and quantum runs, as the 

classical generator was able to rely on Torch’s batched kernels 

and vectorised tensor operations. 

5.4  Cross-Comparison 

To analyse the role adversarial training has in the perfor -

mance of the current model, ablation studies were performed 

on the classical model (due to the quantum model being 

computationally expensive). The auxiliary and reconstructive 

terms were disabled to examine how the model performs 

without the stabilising terms – see  Table III .                                       

> TABLE III
> Cross-Comparative Study Results
> Model MMD (↓) COV (%, ↑) 1-NNA (%, ↓)
> Full model 0.064±0.00𝟓 𝟎 .𝟓 𝟕 ±0.4065.91±0.83
> Auxiliary Ablation 0.061±0.0050.34±0.9066.95±0.83
> Geometric Ablation 0.064±0.0050.19±0.2965.96±0.54
> Adversarial Only 𝟎 .𝟎 𝟓 𝟕 ±0.0049.46±0.33𝟔 𝟓 .𝟏 𝟗 ±1.40
> All metrics reported as mean ± standard deviation across 3 independent
> training runs. Best score is bolded.

Ablations of the various regularising terms reveal the 

efficacy of the additional auxiliary and geometric terms. 

Specifically, the removal of all additional loss terms in the 

adversarial-only case resulted in the best MMD ( 0.057 ±

0.00) and 1-NNA scores ( 65.189% ± 1.40%). By comparison, 

removal of the geometric terms resulted in an increase of the 

coverage metric, which is expected when geometric fidelity 

is de-prioritised. Additionally, ablation of auxiliary terms 

resulted in a degradation of coverage and 1-NNA scores, albeit 

marginally outperforming the geometric ablation in MMD. It 

was expected that geometric terms act as regularisers of geo -

metric fidelity, which may influence the network to approach 

more average modes (the penalty against coverage which the 

auxiliary terms successfully offset). The full model, as would 

be expected, was middling, with average point cloud metrics 

across the board. 

Despite a decrease in point cloud metrics, the network 

exhibits an increase in geometric errors when geometric terms 

are ablated. Indeed, this degradation in performance reflects 

the perceptual differences of the synthetic shapes, wherein 

the geometries tended to exhibit more local artefacts. The 

full model, therefore, provides a more balanced objective than 

the ablative models, sacrificing some distributional fidelity for 

improved geometry. 

5.5  Limitations 

It should be noted that the current quantum generator is 

evaluated under classical simulation. Thus, the runtime char -

acteristics represent simulator overhead rather than physical 

quantum hardware, and the results should be interpreted as 

a proof-of-concept exploration of hybrid architectures. More -

over, computational efficiency is difficult to assess in a hybrid 

quantum-classical hardware setting, as architecturally, the 

quantum GAN relies on several heavy classical computations 

that may remain costly under a quantum-hardware regime. 

Additionally, the dataset used for the framework was limited 

in size due to computational resource costs, and its shapes 

were also segmented to the same length as the synthetic 

shapes for training purposes. Given the baseline coverage 

(COV) results, and size constraints, the dataset may limit the 

generalisability of the framework to real-world CAD geome -

tries. 

The models also exhibited difficulty in accurately synthe -

sising global structures such as symmetry, likely as a result 

of requiring global segment coordination (which is purely an 

emergent property for our GAN). The architecture therefore 

may benefit from additional global priors or conditioning 

methods to better extrapolate global structures from local 

curvature. 

6 Conclusion and Future Work 

This work introduces HMB-GAN, a fully-differentiable 

geometric GAN that constructs shapes through stitched multi-

segment Bézier curves. Across all point cloud metrics, the 

quantum architecture showed modest improvements, also 

achieving marked reduction in model parameters and faster 

convergence across epochs (though at substantially higher 

computational cost due to simulation overhead). Although 

current simulated-quantum evaluation is constrained by clas -

sical hardware, these findings suggest that with improved 

quantum processing methods, VQCs may offer advantages in 

modelling nonlinear relationships in geometric domains. 

Acknowledgment 

The authors would like to sincerely acknowledge the School 

of Science, Computing and Emerging Technologies, School 

of Engineering and School of Design and Architecture, Swin -

burne University of Technology for their generous support and 

resources throughout this research. 

6References 

[1]  P. Achlioptas, O. Diamanti, I. Mitliagkas, and L. Guibas, “Learning 

representations and generative models for 3d point clouds,” in  Interna -

tional conference on machine learning , 2018, pp. 40–49. 

[2]  L. Piegl and W. Tiller, “B-spline curves and surfaces,”  The NURBS 

book . Springer, pp. 81–116, 1997. 

[3]  P.-L. Dallaire-Demers and N. Killoran, “Quantum generative adversarial 

networks,”  Physical Review A , vol. 98, no. 1, p. 12324, 2018. 

[4]  W. Liu, Y. Zhang, Z. Deng, J. Zhao, and L. Tong, “A hybrid 

quantum-classical conditional generative adversarial network algorithm 

for human-centered paradigm in cloud,”  EURASIP Journal on Wireless 

Communications and Networking , vol. 2021, no. 1, p. 37, 2021. 

[5]  I. J. Goodfellow  et al. , “Generative adversarial nets,”  Advances in neural 

information processing systems , vol. 27, 2014. 

[6]  T.-M. Li, M. Lukáč, M. Gharbi, and J. Ragan-Kelley, “Differentiable 

vector graphics rasterization for editing and learning,”  ACM Transac -

tions on Graphics (TOG) , vol. 39, no. 6, pp. 1–15, 2020. 

[7]  A. Carlier, M. Danelljan, A. Alahi, and R. Timofte, “Deepsvg: A hier -

archical generative network for vector graphics animation,”  Advances 

in Neural Information Processing Systems , vol. 33, pp. 16351–16361, 

2020. 

[8]  D. Ha and D. Eck, “A Neural Representation of Sketch Drawings.” [On -

line]. Available:  https://arxiv.org/abs/1704.03477 

[9]  W. Chen, K. Chiu, and M. D. Fuge, “Airfoil Design Parameterization 

and Optimization Using Bézier Generative Adversarial Networks,” 

AIAA Journal , vol. 58, no. 11, pp. 4723–4735, 2020. 

[10]  K. He, X. Zhang, S. Ren, and J. Sun, “Deep Residual Learning 

for Image Recognition,” in  Proceedings of the IEEE Conference on 

Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR) , June 2016. 

[11]  A. Pérez-Salinas, A. Cervera-Lierta, E. Gil-Fuster, and J. I. Latorre, 

“Data re-uploading for a universal quantum classifier,”  Quantum , vol. 

4, p. 226, 2020. 

[12]  M. Zaheer, S. Kottur, S. Ravanbakhsh, B. Poczos, R. R. Salakhutdinov, 

and A. J. Smola, “Deep sets,”  Advances in neural information process -

ing systems , vol. 30, 2017. 

[13]  C. R. Qi, H. Su, K. Mo, and L. J. Guibas, “Pointnet: Deep learning on 

point sets for 3d classification and segmentation,” in  Proceedings of the 

IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern recognition , 2017, 

pp. 652–660. 

[14]  H. Wang, Z. Jiang, L. Yi, K. Mo, H. Su, and L. J. Guibas, “Rethinking 

sampling in 3D point cloud generative adversarial networks,”  arXiv 

preprint arXiv:2006.07029 , 2020. 

[15]  T. Miyato, T. Kataoka, M. Koyama, and Y. Yoshida, “Spectral 

normalization for generative adversarial networks,”  arXiv preprint 

arXiv:1802.05957 , 2018. 

[16]  R. Wang, A. Cully, H. J. Chang, and Y. Demiris, “Magan: Mar -

gin adaptation for generative adversarial networks,”  arXiv preprint 

arXiv:1704.03817 , 2017. 

[17]  T. Salimans, I. Goodfellow, W. Zaremba, V. Cheung, A. Radford, and 

X. Chen, “Improved techniques for training gans,”  Advances in neural 

information processing systems , vol. 29, 2016. 

[18]  Q. Mao, H.-Y. Lee, H.-Y. Tseng, S. Ma, and M.-H. Yang, “Mode 

seeking generative adversarial networks for diverse image synthesis,” 

in  Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF conference on computer vision and 

pattern recognition , 2019, pp. 1429–1437. 

[19]  H. Fan, H. Su, and L. J. Guibas, “A Point Set Generation Network 

for 3D Object Reconstruction from a Single Image,” in  Proceedings 

of the IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition 

(CVPR) , 2017, pp. 605–613. 

[20]  D. McNamee, “Calculating Area of Closed Curves in  ℝ².” 2016. 

[21]  M. ``Pomax'' Kamermans, “A Primer on Bézier Curves.” 2023. 

[22]  T. Akiba, S. Sano, T. Yanase, T. Ohta, and M. Koyama, “Optuna: A 

Next-generation Hyperparameter Optimization Framework.” [Online]. 

Available:  https://arxiv.org/abs/1907.10902 

[23]  A. Seff, Y. Ovadia, W. Zhou, and R. P. Adams, “SketchGraphs: A Large-

Scale Dataset for Modeling Relational Geometry in Computer-Aided 

Design,” in  ICML 2020 Workshop on Object-Oriented Learning , 2020. 

[24]  G. Yang, X. Huang, Z. Hao, M.-Y. Liu, S. Belongie, and B. Hariharan, 

“Pointflow: 3d point cloud generation with continuous normalizing 

flows,” in  Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF international conference on 

computer vision , 2019, pp. 4541–4550. 

[25]  A. Asadi  et al. , “Hybrid quantum programming with pennylane light -

ning on hpc platforms,”  arXiv preprint arXiv:2403.02512 , 2024. 

[26]  mlxd (PennyLane team), “Multi-core computation with lightning.qubit 

and OpenMP support — PennyLane Discussion Forum, post #7.” [On -

line]. Available:  https://discuss.pennylane.ai/t/multi-core-computation-

with-lightning-qubit-and-openmp-support/8776/7 

7