Title: Toward Trustworthy AI: Multi-Target Adversarial Attacks and Robust Defenses for Continuous Data Summarization

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2606.11804v1

Published Time: Thu, 11 Jun 2026 00:45:42 GMT

Number of Pages: 28

Markdown Content:
> IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION FORENSICS AND SECURITY, VOL. 14, NO. 8, AUGUST 2021 1

# Toward Trustworthy AI: Multi-Target Adversarial Attacks and Robust Defenses for Continuous Data Summarization 

Yuefang Lian, Longkun Guo †,‡, Senior Member, IEEE , Zhongrui Zhao †, Zhigang Lu, Member, IEEE , Yanan Cai, Shuchao Pang, Member, IEEE , Dachuan Xu, Jason Xue Senior Member, IEEE ,

Abstract —Trustworthy AI requires reliable data-processing pipelines, not only robust downstream predictive models. As an upstream component, data summarization determines which information is retained and passed to subsequent learning or decision modules. Therefore, adversarial perturbations to the summarization process can compromise trustworthy AI in an upstream manner: they may alter the selected summary, re-duce its representativeness, and further degrade the utility of subsequent learning tasks. In this paper, we study adversarial attacks on continuous data summarization under similarity-level perturbations through DR-submodular optimization. We show that a class of multi-resolution image summarization objectives can be formulated as multilinear extensions of non-negative submodular set functions and satisfy DR-submodularity with 

m-weak monotonicity. We then formulate multi-target attack generation as a min-max problem, where one admissible per-turbation of the similarity structure is optimized to degrade multiple target summarization models. To mitigate such per-turbations, we formulate robust defense against mixed attack types as a regularized max-min problem. For both problems, we develop approximation algorithms with theoretical guarantees. Experiments on real-data and controlled clustered benchmarks show that the proposed attack is effective in representative low-to-moderate budget regimes and can induce downstream task-performance loss. The proposed defense improves the robustness– mitigation trade-off in structured settings, while also revealing the parameter sensitivity of robust protection on real data. 

Index Terms —Trustworthy AI, continuous data summariza-tion, adversarial robustness 

I. I NTRODUCTION 

# TRUSTWORTHY AI requires the reliability of the en-tire data-processing pipeline, not only the robustness of downstream predictive models. In many AI systems, data summarization and sample selection are used as upstream components to extract representative information before train-ing, retrieval, storage, or decision making. Although these procedures are often treated as benign preprocessing steps, 

Manuscript received April 19, 2021; revised August 16, 2021. 

†: equal contribution, ‡: corresponding author Yuefang Lian is with Nankai University, Tianjin, China. This work was done when Yuefang was a visiting PhD student with James Cook University and Western Sydney University during PhD candidature at Beijing University of Technology. Longkun Guo is with Fuzhou University, Fuzhou, China. Zhongrui Zhao and Yanan Cai are with James Cook University, Townsville, Australia and Western Sydney University, Sydney, Australia. Zhigang Lu is with Western Sydney University, Sydney, Australia. This work was partially done when Zhigang was a Lecturer with James Cook University. Shuchao Pang is with Nanjing University of Science and Technology, Nanjing, China. Dachuan Xu is with Beijing University of Technology, Beijing, China. Jason Xue is with CSIRO’s Data 61, Sydney, Australia and Responsible AI Research (RAIR) Centre, The University of Adelaide, Australia. 

they determine which data are retained and passed to sub-sequent modules. Therefore, adversarial perturbations to the summarization process may compromise trustworthy AI in an upstream manner: they can remove representative information, increase redundancy, distort the selected training or retrieval set, and eventually reduce downstream task reliability. This makes adversarial robustness of data summarization a security-relevant problem for trustworthy AI pipelines. Continuous submodular maximization provides a natural mathematical framework for modeling summarization and selection tasks. Classical results on submodular functions and multilinear relaxations [1], [2] established the importance of diminishing-returns structure in discrete and continuous optimization, and subsequent studies have used this structure for budget allocation, data summarization, and representative selection [3]–[5]. Submodular optimization has also appeared in security-related data-processing problems, such as attack detection scheduling in large-scale networks under false data injection attacks [6]. However, these works do not study adversarial vulnerability of the summarization process itself as an upstream component in trustworthy AI pipelines. This upstream vulnerability becomes particularly relevant in similarity-based continuous summarization. Many summa-rization objectives are constructed from pairwise similarities or feature-induced similarity scores, and the summarizer opti-mizes a soft selection vector based on this similarity structure. Thus, the similarity-construction stage naturally becomes an attack surface: an adversary may perturb the similarity matrix without directly modifying the final summary decision vari-able. Such perturbations may arise from manipulated feature representations in retrieval-style systems or poisoned samples that alter neighborhood- or similarity-based structures [7], [8]. After the summarization module is executed on the perturbed objective, the selected summary may become less repre-sentative when evaluated under the original clean objective. The risk is further amplified in multi-target settings, where several summarization models may be built from related data sources or similar feature representations. In such cases, a single perturbation to the upstream similarity structure may simultaneously degrade multiple target summarization models, motivating a multi-target attack formulation for similarity-based continuous summarization. Existing studies on adversarial attacks and robust optimiza-tion provide important foundations, but they do not directly address the setting considered in this paper. On the attack side, prior work has studied adversarial sample generation for discrete submodular optimization [9], [10] and general non-convex min-max formulations [11]. However, these meth- 

> arXiv:2606.11804v1 [cs.AI] 10 Jun 2026 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION FORENSICS AND SECURITY, VOL. 14, NO. 8, AUGUST 2021 2

ods do not explicitly model the combination of continuity, DR-submodularity, and m-weak monotonicity that arises in the continuous summarization problem considered here, nor do they focus on generating one shared perturbation that attacks multiple summarization models simultaneously. On the defense side, robust submodular optimization has been studied for set functions, monotone continuous models, and general non-convex robust formulations [11]–[14]. Yet these methods do not explicitly address robust protection for weakly monotone DR-submodular summarization models under mixed similarity-level attack types. As a result, the attack and de-fense mechanisms of continuous summarization remain in-sufficiently understood, especially from the perspective of downstream reliability in trustworthy AI pipelines. In this paper, we study the adversarial vulnerability and robust protection of continuous data summarization under perturbations of the upstream similarity structure. Instead of directly modifying the final summary decision, the adversary perturbs the similarity matrix that defines the summariza-tion objective. This similarity-level threat model captures an upstream attack surface in trustworthy AI pipelines, where degraded summaries may affect the representative information passed to downstream modules. To address this issue, we develop a DR-submodular optimization framework for multi-target attack generation and robust defense, and evaluate it on real-data multilinear-extension summarization and a controlled clustered multi-target benchmark. The former tests the theory-aligned objective on real data, while the latter provides an interpretable setting for analyzing the attack mechanism and downstream consequences through known cluster and repre-sentative structure. 

Contributions. The main contributions of this paper are summarized as follows.  

> •

We provide a DR-submodular formulation for a class of multi-resolution image summarization objectives. Specif-ically, we show that the corresponding discrete util-ity is non-negative, submodular, and m-weakly mono-tone under a controlled redundancy condition, and that its multilinear extension preserves non-negativity, DR-submodularity, and weak monotonicity.  

> •

We introduce a similarity-level threat model for continu-ous data summarization, where the adversary perturbs the upstream similarity structure rather than directly modify-ing the final summary decision. Under this model, we formulate multi-target attack generation for data summa-rization as a structured min-max optimization problem and develop a structure-aware approximation algorithm for constructing one shared perturbation across multiple target summarization models.  

> •

We formulate robust defense against admissible similarity-level perturbations as a regularized max-min optimization problem. We develop a robust continuous grtype algorithm for m-weakly monotone DR-submodular objectives and establish an approximation guarantee under standard smoothness.  

> •

We conduct empirical evaluations on real-data multilinear-extension summarization and a controlled clustered multi-target benchmark. The results show that optimized similarity perturbations can induce measurable summarization degradation in representative budget regimes. Downstream evaluations further demonstrate that such degradation can translate into task-level performance loss, and that robust summaries can recover downstream reliability by restoring class/cluster coverage. These findings connect adversarial summarization to the reliability of trustworthy AI pipelines. II. R ELATED WORK 

This section reviews prior work related to adversarial attack generation and robust optimization in submodular settings, with an emphasis on their relevance to secure data processing and trustworthy AI. 

A. Attack Generation with Submodular Structure 

Attack generation has been studied in several optimization and security-related settings where submodular structure is used to model diminishing returns in perturbation, selection, or degradation effects. In DC microgrids, Liu et al. [15] leveraged submodular structure to construct false data injection attacks by exploiting the submodularity of system state error. Zhu et al. [16] studied attacks that degrade network robust-ness through edge perturbations, using greedy optimization for robustness-related objectives. In text classification, Lei et al. [10] showed that the perturbation search space for attack-ing certain neural models exhibits submodularity, allowing attack generation to be formulated as a submodular opti-mization problem. More closely related to our setting, Adibi et al. [9] studied convex-submodular min-max optimization and obtained theoretical guarantees for discrete submodular attack generation and the multilinear extension of monotone set-submodular functions. In a different direction, Wang et al. [11] considered adversarial attack generation from a general non-convex min-max optimizaton perspective and analyzed convergence toward stationary solutions. These works provide important foundations for studying adversarial vulnerability in structured optimization problems. However, they do not explicitly address the setting considered here, where the attack target consists of multiple continu-ous summarization models with DR-submodularity and m-weak monotonicity, and where the goal is to construct a single perturbation that simultaneously degrades several target summarization models. Our work complements these lines of research by focusing on adversarial robustness evaluation for continuous data summarization, a security-relevant component of trustworthy AI pipelines. 

B. Robust Submodular Optimization 

Robust submodular optimization has been studied in several important application domains, including observation selec-tion [17] and influence maximization [18], [19]. These works typically consider maximizing the worst-case value over a family of submodular set functions. Another relevant line studies robust optimization in adversarial non-convex set-tings, where problems are formulated as nonconvex-concave IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION FORENSICS AND SECURITY, VOL. 14, NO. 8, AUGUST 2021 3

TABLE I POSITIONING OF REPRESENTATIVE OPTIMIZATION FRAMEWORKS RELATED TO ATTACK GENERATION AND ROBUST DEFENSE .                                                       

> Ref. Role Model setting Cont. Multi-target / mixed Guarantee Relation to this work
> [9] Attack Set submodular, monotone No No (1 −1/e )-approx. Discrete, single-target [9] Attack Multilinear extension, monotone Yes No (1 /2) -approx. Continuous but monotone and single-target [11] Attack General non-convex min-max Yes Yes Stationary point Baseline, no DR-submodular ratio [13] Defense DR-submodular, monotone Yes No (1 /2) -approx. Monotone model, no mixed attack defense [14] Defense DR-submodular, monotone Yes No (1 −1/e )-approx. Monotone robust DR-submodular setting [11] Defense General non-convex robust Yes Yes Stationary point Handles mixed attacks, stationary guarantees This work Attack / defense DR-submodular, m-weakly monotone Yes Yes m(1 −1/e )-approx. Continuous weakly monotone summarization with multi-target attack and mixed defense

saddle-point problems and solved by exploiting connections to continuous submodularity [12], with extensions to security games [20] and distributionally robust settings [21]. For continuous submodular optimization, Lee et al. [13] studied non-smooth and H¨ older-smooth submodular maxi-mization and derived approximation guarantees that can be used in robust formulations. Lian et al. [14] proposed a zeroth-order approximation algorithm for robust DR-submodular maximization by solving a non-smooth up-concave optimiza-tion problem. Wang et al. [11] also considered robust opti-mization against mixed adversarial attacks in a general non-convex setting, but the resulting guarantees are given in terms of stationary solutions. These works are closely related to the defense side of our problem, but they do not explicitly address robust protection for continuous DR-submodular summariza-tion models with m-weak monotonicity under mixed attack types. Our work extends this literature by studying robust protection for an upstream data summarization component in trustworthy AI pipelines, where adversarial perturbations may affect multiple target summarization models simultaneously. Table I summarizes representative theoretical frameworks related to our attack and defense formulations. This table is intended to clarify differences in modeling assumptions and guarantee types; it is not an empirical baseline list, since several methods rely on monotonicity or single-target formulations and are therefore not directly applicable to our weakly monotone multi-target summarization setting. III. P RELIMINARIES 

A. Basic Notation and Structural Properties 

For x, y ∈ Rn, we denote (x ∨ y)i = max {xi, yi} and 

(x ∧ y)i = min {xi, yi}. Moreover, x ≤ y means that xi ≤ yi

for all i ∈ [n]. We first recall the definition of continuous DR-submodularity. 

Definition 1 (DR-submodularity [22]) . Given a convex set 

D ⊆ Rn, a continuous function f : D → R is said to be DR-submodular over D if, for any x ≤ y ∈ D and any a ∈

R+ such that aei + x ∈ D and aei + y ∈ D , the following diminishing-returns property holds for every i ∈ { 1, . . . , n }:

f (aei + x) − f (x) ≥ f (aei + y) − f (y).

Throughout the paper, the feasible set X is assumed to be a down-closed convex set, namely, if x ∈ X and 0 ≤ y ≤ x,then y ∈ X . We also assume that the objective function is non-negative. To characterize DR-submodular functions that are not fully monotone, we use the notion of m-weak mono-tonicity over continuous domains, extending the corresponding concept for set functions in [23]. 

Definition 2 (m-weakly monotone) . For the maximization of a non-negative continuous function f over a feasible set X ,we say that f is m-weakly monotone if 

f (x ∨ y) ≥ mf (x), ∀x, y ∈ X .

When m = 1 , the above definition reduces to standard monotonicity, i.e., f (x ∨ y) ≥ f (x) for all x, y ∈ X . For additional properties of DR-submodular functions and exam-ples of m-weak monotonicity, we refer readers to [22], [23]. For constrained maximization problems, we use the standard notion of an (α, ϵ )-approximation, meaning that the returned solution achieves at least an α fraction of the optimal value up to an additive error ϵ, i.e., f (xoutput ) ≥ αf (x∗)−ϵ, where x∗

is an optimal solution, α ∈ (0 , 1] is the approximation ratio, and ϵ ≥ 0 is the optimization accuracy. 

B. Multi-Resolution Image Summarization Model 

We instantiate our study through multi-resolution image summarization, which serves as a representative upstream data summarization model in trustworthy AI pipelines. Given a dataset Ω with |Ω| = n, the goal is to select a subset of rep-resentative images that provides good coverage of the dataset while avoiding excessive redundancy. Instead of optimizing directly over discrete subsets, we adopt a continuous relaxation in which each coordinate xν ∈ [0 , 1] represents the probability or soft weight of selecting image ν. After optimization, a deterministic summary can be obtained either by thresholding, e.g., 

Sτ = {ν ∈ Ω : xν ≥ τ },

or by selecting the top-ranked images according to {xν }ν∈Ω.We first define the corresponding discrete summarization utility. For a subset S ⊆ Ω, let 

f (S, Ω) = r(S, Ω) − λn q(S, Ω) , (1) where 

r(S, Ω) = X

> μ∈Ω

max  

> ν∈S

sμ,ν 

is the facility-location representativeness term, and 

q(S, Ω) = X

> μ∈S

X 

> ν∈S, ν ̸=μ

sμ,ν 

is the redundancy penalty. Here sμ,ν ≥ 0 denotes the similarity between images μ and ν, and λ ≥ 0 controls the strength of the redundancy penalty. For the empty set, we adopt the convention max ν∈∅ sμ,ν = 0 , and hence f (∅, Ω) = 0 .The first term rewards selected images that well represent the remaining data points, while the second term discourages IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION FORENSICS AND SECURITY, VOL. 14, NO. 8, AUGUST 2021 4

the simultaneous selection of highly similar images. To ensure that the redundancy penalty does not dominate the representa-tiveness term, we define the redundancy-to-representativeness ratio 

ρΩ = sup  

> ∅̸ =S⊆Ω
> λn

q(S, Ω) 

r(S, Ω) .

Throughout this paper, we assume that r(S, Ω) > 0 for every nonempty feasible set S and that 0 ≤ ρΩ < 1. This condition means that the redundancy penalty is controlled relative to the coverage utility. Under this assumption, we have that 

f (S, Ω) ≥ 0 for all S ⊆ Ω.The continuous objective studied in this paper is defined as the multilinear extension of the discrete utility in (1). Specifically, for x ∈ [0 , 1] n, let S ∼ x denote a random subset of Ω in which each image ν is independently selected with probability xν . We define 

F (x, Ω) = ES∼x [f (S, Ω)] . (2) Equivalently, F (x, Ω) = Rmulti (x, Ω) − Qmulti (x, Ω) , where 

Rmulti (x, Ω) = X

> μ∈Ω

ES∼x



max  

> ν∈S

sμ,ν 



,

and 

Qmulti (x, Ω) = λn

X

> μ∈Ω

X 

> ν∈Ω, ν ̸=μ

xμxν sμ,ν .

The expression for Qmulti follows from the independence of the random selections, since E[1μ∈S 1ν∈S ] = xμxν , where 

μ̸ = ν.The following lemma shows that the continuous objective belongs to the structural class studied in this paper. 

Lemma 1 (Proof in Sec. A2) . Suppose that sμ,ν ≥ 0 for all 

μ, ν ∈ Ω, and define 

ρΩ = sup  

> ∅̸ =S⊆Ω
> λn

q(S, Ω) 

r(S, Ω) .

Assume that r(S, Ω) > 0 for every nonempty feasible set S

and that 0 ≤ ρΩ < 1. Then the discrete utility f (S, Ω) defined in (1) is non-negative, submodular, and mΩ-weakly monotone with mΩ = 1 − ρΩ. Consequently, its multilinear extension 

F (x, Ω) defined in (2) is non-negative, DR-submodular over 

[0 , 1] n, and mΩ-weakly monotone. 

Lemma 1 provides the structural foundation for applying DR-submodular optimization tools to continuous data sum-marization. It shows that the proposed continuous objective inherits the diminishing-returns structure of the underlying discrete summarization utility. However, once the similar-ity matrix is perturbed, the resulting objective must be re-examined to verify whether it remains in the same structural class. To formalize this, we perturb the similarity matrix entrywise. Specifically, for each victim model, the perturbed similarity matrix is given by sμ,ν (v) = sμ,ν + vμ,ν , where the perturbation satisfies 

v ∈ P p(ϵp) = {v : ∥v∥p ≤ ϵp, 0 ≤ sμ,ν + vμ,ν ≤ 1, ∀μ, ν } .

Thus, all perturbed similarities remain nonnegative and bounded in [0 , 1] .The following lemma clarifies when the perturbed objective preserves the structural properties required by our analysis. 

Lemma 2 (Structural preservation under admissible perturba-tions) . Under the perturbation set Pp(ϵp), the perturbed sim-ilarity matrix remains entrywise nonnegative. Moreover, if the perturbed discrete utility f (S, Ω( v)) remains submodular and satisfies ρΩ( v) < 1, then its multilinear extension F (x, Ω( v)) 

is non-negative, DR-submodular with respect to x, and mΩ( v)-weakly monotone, where mΩ( v) = 1 − ρΩ( v).

Accordingly, the theoretical results in the following sections are stated for perturbations under which the perturbed objec-tive remains within the same non-negative DR-submodular and weakly monotone structural class. 

C. Threat Model and Attack Surface 

We consider a data-processing pipeline in which raw data are first converted into feature representations, a similarity structure is then constructed from these representations, and a continuous summarization module selects or weights rep-resentative items before the summarized data are used by downstream learning or decision modules. In this pipeline, the summarization module is an upstream component: it determines which information is retained and therefore can affect the reliability of subsequent tasks. 

1) Attack surface: This paper focuses on similarity-level attacks against the summarization module. This perturbation model abstracts attacks on the representation or similarity-construction stage of the summarization pipeline. As for-malized in Sec. III-B, the adversary applies an admissible perturbation v ∈ P p(ϵp) to the upstream similarity structure used by the summarization objective, while all perturbed similarities remain valid scores in [0 , 1] . Note that the ad-versary does not directly choose the final summary, modify the summarization decision variable x, or edit the rounded summary Sk(x). Instead, the attack affects the summarizer indirectly by changing the objective on which the summary is optimized. The summarization algorithm is then executed on the perturbed objective, and the resulting summary is evaluated under the original clean objective to measure the quality loss caused by the upstream perturbation. 

2) Adversary’s knowledge and capability: We mainly study a white-box, gradient-access adversary. The adversary knows the summarization objective, the feasible set, and the per-turbation budget, and can query the target summarization models to obtain function-value and gradient information. This setting is used to evaluate worst-case vulnerability of optimization-based summarization systems and provides an upper bound on the damage that a structure-aware adversary may cause. In the multi-target setting, the adversary aims to construct a single perturbation that degrades multiple target summarization models simultaneously, rather than generating a separate perturbation for each model. 

3) Defender’s knowledge and objective: The defender con-trols the summarization algorithm and seeks a solution that remains useful under possible perturbations of the similarity structure. Since the defender may not know in advance which IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION FORENSICS AND SECURITY, VOL. 14, NO. 8, AUGUST 2021 5                          

> Raw data
> Ω
> Feature vectors
> Clean similarity
> S
> Continuous summarizer decision x
> Selected summary
> Downstream task
> White-box adversary
> Queries values/gradients
> Admissible perturbation
> v∈ P p(ϵp)
> Perturbed similarity
> S+v
> Validity
> 0≤S+v≤1
> No direct edit of
> xor summary Multi-model setting: one perturbation affects multiple target summarizers
> Mixed attack sets
> {P j}Jj=1
> Max–min robust solver
> max xmin w,vjG
> Robust summary decision
> xrob
> Clean-objective evaluation
> Task-level reliability
> Fig. 1. Threat model and attack surface for similarity-based continuous summarization. The clean pipeline constructs a similarity matrix S, optimizes a continuous summarization decision x, and passes the selected summary to downstream tasks. The adversary has white-box query access and perturbs the upstream similarity structure through an admissible perturbation v∈ P p(ϵp), yielding S+v, but does not directly edit xor the final summary. The defender solves a max–min robust summarization problem over mixed perturbation sets {P j}Jj=1 . Both summarization utility and downstream task reliability are evaluated to connect optimization-level degradation with trustworthy-AI pipeline reliability.

type of perturbation will occur, we consider a mixed-attack setting. Each attack type j ∈ [J] is associated with a feasible perturbation set Pj . The defender therefore optimizes the summarization decision against the worst-case mixture of these perturbations. The goal is not to eliminate all possible performance loss, but to reduce attack-induced utility degrada-tion while maintaining high clean-data summarization quality. 

4) Scope and limitations: The proposed threat model is most appropriate for systems in which the similarity matrix, or the representation module used to construct it, is accessible or indirectly manipulable. We do not assume that every ad-missible entrywise similarity perturbation can be realized by imperceptible pixel-level changes to raw inputs. Instead, the perturbation set provides a controlled abstraction for analyzing how bounded changes to the upstream similarity structure af-fect the summarization solution and its clean-objective utility. Fig. 1 summarizes the clean summarization pipeline, the similarity-level attack surface, the defender’s robust protection mechanism, and the downstream evaluation protocol. 

D. Attack and Defense Formulations 

Based on the threat model above, we now formalize the attack and defense problems. On the attack side, the adversary searches for a bounded perturbation of the similarity structure that causes the summarization algorithm to output lower-quality solutions under the clean objective. On the defense side, the model owner seeks a summarization solution that remains stable and useful under mixed perturbation types. 

1) Multi-Target Attack Formulation: Suppose there are I

target summarization models. To generate a single perturbation that degrades all target models simultaneously, we consider 

min  

> v∈P , t

t s.t. max 

> xi∈X i

Fi(v, xi) ≤ t, ∀i ∈ [I],

where v ∈ P is the perturbation applied to the similarity structure and xi ∈ X i is the summarization decision for the 

i-th model. To obtain a tractable formulation, we introduce the weight vector w and define the min-max convex-submodular problem as 

min  

> v∈P

max  

> w∈W ,xi∈X i

ϕ(v, w, {xi}), (3) where ϕ(v, w, {xi}) = PIi=1 wiFi(v, xi), and W =w 1T w = 1 , wi ∈ [0 , 1] , ∀i . Here, Fi(v, xi) denotes the objective value of the i-th attacked summarization model defined on the perturbed dataset Ωi(v). We use the following approximation notion for the attack problem. We say that ¯v is an (α, ϵ )-approximation min-max solution of (3) if 

α max  

> w∈W ,xi∈X i

ϕ(¯ v, w, {xi}) ≤ OPT minmax + ϵ, 

where OPT minmax = min v∈P max w∈W , xi∈X i ϕ(v, w, {xi}).

2) Robust Defense Formulation: We now turn to the de-fender’s perspective. Since the model owner may face multiple possible attack types and may not know in advance which one will occur, we seek a robust solution that performs well against mixed attacks. Let vj ∈ P j denote the perturbation associated with the j-th attack type, where j ∈ [J]. We then consider the following regularized max-min submodular-convex formulation: 

max  

> x∈X

min   

> w∈W ,vj∈P j

G(x, w, {vj }), (4) where 

G(x, w, {vj }) =

> J

X

> j=1

wj F (x, vj )+ λv

2

> J

X

> j=1

∥vj ∥22 + γ

2 w − 1

J 1

> 22

.IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION FORENSICS AND SECURITY, VOL. 14, NO. 8, AUGUST 2021 6

Here, for perturbations under which the perturbed objective remains in the same structural class, F (x, vj ) is non-negative, 

m-weakly monotone, and DR-submodular with respect to x,while w lies in the simplex set 

W = w 1T w = 1 , w j ∈ [0 , 1] , ∀j ∈ [J] .

The regularization parameter λv > 0 is introduced to stabilize the inner minimization with respect to the perturbation vari-ables and to induce strong convexity in vj . The regularization parameter γ > 0 is introduced to avoid over-concentration on any single attack type and to promote balanced robustness across mixed attacks. We use the following approximation notion for the robust defense problem. We say that ¯x is a (β, ϵ )-approximation max-min solution of (4) if 

min   

> w∈W ,vj∈P j

G(¯ x, w, {vj }) ≥ β OPT maxmin − ϵ, 

where OPT maxmin = max x∈X min w∈W , vj ∈P j G(x, w, {vj }).IV. A DVERSARIAL ATTACK GENERATION AGAINST 

MULTIPLE SUMMARIZATION MODELS 

In this section, we study multi-target adversarial attack generation for continuous summarization models, with the goal of characterizing adversarial vulnerability in an upstream data summarization component of trustworthy AI pipelines. We first present a greedy maximization subroutine for m-weakly monotone DR-submodular objectives, and then build a multi-target attack algorithm on top of it. Detailed proofs are deferred to the Appendix. 

A. Greedy Maximization Subroutine 

For a fixed perturbation v, we consider the problem 

max  

> x∈X

F (v, x),

where X is a down-closed convex set with diameter D.To solve this problem, we introduce a continuous greedy-type procedure, denoted by Mgreedy . Since F (v, x) is only 

m-weakly monotone rather than fully monotone, negative gradient coordinates may decrease the objective value. We therefore use the clipped gradient 

g(xt) := ∇xF (v, xt) ∨ 0,

which removes descent directions. As a result, the update direction only keeps coordinates corresponding to nonnegative partial derivatives, and the following identity holds: 

⟨∇ xF (v, xt), xt+1 − xt⟩ = ⟨g(xt), xt+1 − xt⟩ . (5) This relation is central to the approximation analysis. We can now state the approximation guarantee of Mgreedy .

Theorem 1 (Proof in Sec. B) . Let F (v, x) be a nonnegative, 

L-smooth, DR-submodular function that is also m-weakly monotone. Then the output xT of Alg. 1 satisfies 

F (v, xT ) ≥ m(1 − 1/e ) max  

> x∈X

F (v, x) − ϵ

after O(LD 2/ϵ ) iterations. 

Algorithm 1 General Continuous Greedy Algorithm Mgreedy 

Input: F (v, x), X , T , and x0 = 0 

> 1:

for t = 0 , . . . , T − 1 do  

> 2:

Compute 

¯dt = arg max  

> d∈X

⟨g(xt), d⟩, g(xt) = ∇xF (v, xt) ∨ 0 

> 3:

Direction clipping: 

[dt]s =

(

[¯dt]s, s ∈ { s : [ ∇F (v, xt)] s ≥ 0},

0, otherwise  

> 4:

xt+1 = xt + 1 

> T

dt 

> 5:

end for  

> 6:

Return xT

Algorithm 2 Minmax Convex-Submodular Approximation Algorithm 

Input: v0, w0, iteration number K, subroutine Mgreedy , and con-straint sets P, W, Xi 

> 1:

for k = 0 , . . . , K − 1 do  

> 2:

For i = 1 , . . . , I , run 

xik+1 = Mgreedy (Fi(vk , xi), Xi, T ) 

> 3:

Update wk+1 = arg max w∈W ϕ(vk , w, {xik+1 }) 

> 4:

Update 

vk+1 = proj P



vk − η∇v ϕ(vk , wk+1 , {xik+1 })

 

> 5:

end for  

> 6:

Return ¯v = 1

> K

PKk=1 vk

Assuming the availability of gradient evaluations and a linear maximization oracle (LMO), we obtain the following oracle complexity. 

Corollary 1 (Oracle complexity of Mgreedy ). Under the same assumptions as Theorem 1, Alg. 1 achieves an (m(1 −e−1), ϵ )-approximation using O(ϵ−1) gradient evaluations and O(ϵ−1)

LMO calls. B. Multi-Target Attack Algorithm 

We now build a multi-target attack algorithm on top of 

Mgreedy . At each outer iteration, the algorithm approximately solves the inner maximization over {xi} using Mgreedy ,updates the model weights w by maximizing the current aggregated objective, and then performs a projected gradient step on the perturbation variable v.For each iterate vk, Alg. 2 first computes approximate max-imizers {xik+1 } for all target models, then updates the weight vector wk+1 to emphasize the currently worst-performing models, and finally updates the perturbation variable vk+1 by a projected gradient step over P. Here the Euclidean projection operator is defined by 

proj P (a) = arg min  

> x∈P

∥x − a∥22.

We impose the following regularity conditions for the attack analysis. IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION FORENSICS AND SECURITY, VOL. 14, NO. 8, AUGUST 2021 7

Assumption 1. For each target model, Fi(v, xi) is differ-entiable, M -Lipschitz continuous in (v, xi), L-smooth with respect to xi, and convex with respect to v. Moreover, each 

Xi is a down-closed convex set with diameter DXi , and P is a compact convex set with diameter DP .C. Approximation Guarantee and Oracle Complexity 

The following guarantee is conditional on convexity of the attacked objective with respect to the variable v for Alg. 2. 

Theorem 2 (Proof in Sec. B) . For adversarial sample gen-eration across multiple smooth DR-submodular maximization models that are m-weakly monotone, under Assumption 1 and with η = 1 /√K, the output ¯v of Alg. 2 with subroutine 

Mgreedy satisfies 

m(1 − 1/e ) max  

> w∈W ,xi∈X i

ϕ(¯ v, w, {xi}) ≤ OPT minmax + ϵ

after O(DP /ϵ 2) outer iterations in Alg. 2 and O(LD 2/ϵ )

inner iterations in Mgreedy .

Assuming the availability of gradient evaluations, an LMO, and a projection oracle over convex sets, we obtain the following complexity bound. 

Corollary 2 (Oracle complexity) . Under the same condi-tions as Theorem 2, Alg. 2 achieves an (m(1 − 1/e ), ϵ )-approximation min-max solution with O(Iϵ −3 + ϵ−2) gra-dient evaluations, O(Iϵ −3 + ϵ−2) LMO calls, and O(ϵ−2)

projection-oracle calls. 

The guarantee simplifies in the single-model monotone case. 

Remark 1. When I = 1 and m = 1 , the weight variable disappears and the formulation reduces to 

min  

> v∈P

max  

> x∈X

F (v, x).

In this special case, our method yields a ((1 − 1/e ), ϵ )-approximation guarantee with O(ϵ−3) gradient evaluations, 

O(ϵ−3) LMO calls, and O(ϵ−2) projection-oracle calls. D. Proof Sketch 

The guarantee of Theorem 2 follows from combining an approximate inner maximization step with a projected outer update on the perturbation variable. First, by Theorem 1, the subroutine Mgreedy provides an m(1 − 1/e )-approximate solution for each inner DR-submodular maximization problem. Second, the projected gradient update on v yields a descent-type inequality for the min-max objective through the convex-ity of ϕ(·, w, {xi}) and the projection step. Specifically, the gradient of ϕ with respect to v is 

∇vϕ(v, w, {xi}) = 

> I

X

> i=1

wi∇vFi(v, xi),

and Assumption 1 implies the bound 

∥∇ vϕ(v, w, {xi})∥2 ≤ M 2, ∀ w ∈ W . (6) To quantify one-step progress, define 

τv = ϕ(v, wk+1 , {xik+1 }) − ϕ(vk, wk+1 , {xik+1 }).

The key step is the following inequality. 

Lemma 3. Under Assumption 1, 

τv ≥ ∥vk+1 − v∥2 − ∥ vk − v∥2

2η − ηM 2

2 . (7) Summing (7) over the outer iterations, combining it with the approximation guarantee of Mgreedy for the inner maxi-mization, and then using the convexity of ϕ(·, w, {xi}) yields Theorem 2. The full proofs of Lemma 3 and Theorem 2 are deferred to the Appendix. V. R OBUST DEFENSE UNDER MIXED ATTACKS 

In this section, we study robust protection against adver-sarial perturbations in continuous data summarization under mixed attack types. Our goal is to compute a summarization solution that preserves utility while remaining stable against multiple possible attack constraints. We formulate this protec-tion task as a robust submodular maximization problem and develop a corresponding approximation algorithm. Detailed proofs are deferred to the Appendix. 

A. Robust Continuous Greedy Algorithm 

We propose a robust continuous greedy algorithm for max-imizing an m-weakly monotone DR-submodular objective under mixed attacks. At each outer iteration, the algorithm performs three steps: it first approximately updates each adversarial variable vj by projected gradient descent, then computes the worst-case mixture weights w by solving the inner minimization over W, and finally updates the primal variable x through a clipped-gradient continuous greedy step. More specifically, for a fixed iterate xk, we compute vjT (xk)

by projected gradient descent on G(xk, w, ·) for each attack type j ∈ [J], the gradient with respect to vj is 

∇vj G = wt,j ∇vj F (xk, vjt ) + λvvjt .

and define 

w∗({vjT }k) = arg min  

> w∈W

G(xk, w, {vjT (xk)}).

We then use the clipped gradient 

[∇xG(xk)] + = ∇xG



xk, w∗({vjT }k), {vjT (xk)}



∨ 0,

to define the ascent direction. As in the attack-side greedy routine, clipping removes directions corresponding to negative gradients. Consequently, 

D

∇xG



xk, w∗({vjT }k), {vjT (xk)}



, dk

E

= ⟨[∇xG(xk)] +, dk⟩ .

(8) The complete procedure is given below. We impose the following regularity conditions for the robust defense analysis. 

Assumption 2. Consider the regularized robust model (4) .For perturbations under which the perturbed objective remains in the same structural class, each function F (x, vj ) is non-negative, m-weakly monotone, and DR-submodular with re-spect to x, and is jointly L-smooth with respect to (x, vj ).IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION FORENSICS AND SECURITY, VOL. 14, NO. 8, AUGUST 2021 8

Algorithm 3 Robust Continuous Greedy Algorithm 

Input: v0, w0, η, K, T, Pj , X 

> 1:

for k = 0 , . . . , K − 1 do  

> 2:

Initialize w0(vk ) = w0 

> 3:

for t = 0 , . . . , T − 1 do  

> 4:

For each j ∈ [J], compute 

vjt+1 (xk ) = proj Pj



vjt (xk )

− η∇vj G



xk , wt, {vℓt (xk )}Jℓ=1 

 

. 

> 5:

end for  

> 6:

Compute 

w∗({vjT }k ) = arg min  

> w∈W

G(xk , w, {vjT (xk )})

and ¯dk = arg max  

> d∈X

⟨[∇xG(xk )] +, d⟩ 

> 7:

Direction clipping: 

[dk ]s =

(

[¯dk ]s, s ∈ S ,

0, otherwise ,

where 

S =

n

s :

h

∇xG



xk , w∗({vjT }k ), {vjT (xk )}

i 

> s

≥ 0

o 

> 8:

Set xk+1 = xk + 1 

> K

dk 

> 9:

end for  

> 10:

Return xK

Moreover, each perturbation set Pj is compact and convex, and X ⊆ Rn 

> +

is a down-closed convex set with diameter DX .For each fixed x and w, the inner objective 

> J

X

> j=1

wj F (x, vj ) + λv

2

> J

X

> j=1

∥vj ∥22

is μ-strongly convex with respect to {vj }Jj=1 , where the strong convexity is induced by the quadratic regularization term. 

Under Assumption 2, we can establish the following ap-proximation guarantee and oracle complexity for Alg. 3. 

B. Approximation Guarantee and Oracle Complexity 

We now state the main guarantee of Alg. 3. 

Theorem 3 (Proof in Appendix) . Under Assumption 2, let the inner projected-gradient step size be η = 1 /L and define 

ρ = 1 − μ/L ≤ 1. For any ϵ ∈ (0 , 1) , if 

K ≥ O (ϵ−1) and T ≥ O (log ρ(ϵ−1)) ,

then the output xK of Alg. 3 is an (m(1 − 1/e ), ϵ )-approximation max-min solution to (4) . In particular, 

min   

> w∈W ,vj∈P j

G(xK , w, {vj }) ≥ m(1 − 1/e ) OPT maxmin − ϵ, 

where OPT maxmin = max x∈X min w∈W , vj ∈P j G(x, w, {vj }).

Assuming the availability of gradient evaluations, an LMO, and a projection oracle over convex sets, we obtain the following complexity bound. 

Corollary 3 (Oracle complexity) . Under the same condi-tions as Theorem 3, Alg. 3 produces an (m(1 − 1/e ), ϵ )-approximation max-min solution using 

O Jϵ −1 log ρ ϵ−1 + ϵ−1

gradient evaluations, O(ϵ−1) LMO calls, and 

O Jϵ −1 log ρ ϵ−1 + ϵ−1

projection-oracle calls. 

Remark 2. For the special case J = 1 and m = 1,our method provides a (1 − 1/e )-approximation guarantee for robust monotone DR-submodular maximization. Thus, it recovers the best-known approximation ratio in the single-attack setting, while additionally accommodating mixed attack types in the more general framework studied here. C. Proof Sketch 

We briefly outline why Alg. 3 achieves a robust approxi-mation guarantee under mixed attacks. First, under Assumption 2, the inner projected-gradient updates on vj contract toward the corresponding minimizers of the regularized inner problem. In particular, if ρ = 1 −μ/L ,then 

∥vjT (xk) − vj ∗(xk)∥ ≤ ρT / 2DPj .

Second, define the value function 

Φ( x) := min   

> w∈W ,vj∈P j

G(x, w, {vj }). (9) Using standard sensitivity arguments for strongly convex inner problems, one can show that Φ is smooth and that the min-imizer w∗ varies Lipschitz-continuously with the adversarial variables. Third, the continuous greedy update on x yields a one-step improvement inequality of the form 

Φ( xk+1 ) − Φ( xk)

≥ 1

K



mΦ( x∗) − Φ( xk) − 2DX ∥∆k∥ − LΦ

2K D2

> X



,

where ∆k = ∇Φ( xk) − ∇ xG



xk, w∗({vjT }k), {vjT (xk)}



.Bounding ∥∆k∥ by the contraction error of the inner vj -updates and telescoping the above inequality over k =0, . . . , K − 1 yields Theorem 3. The detailed proofs of the auxiliary lemmas and the complete proof of Theorem 3 are deferred to the Appendix. VI. E XPERIMENTAL EVALUATION 

We organize the experimental evaluation around two com-plementary theory-aligned settings. First, we evaluate the proposed attack and defense algorithms on the multilinear-extension summarization model constructed from real image datasets, which is directly consistent with the DR-submodular analysis in Sec. IV and Sec. V. Second, we introduce a con-trolled clustered multi-target benchmark to isolate the attack-defense mechanism under a known representative structure. The first setting is used to evaluate utility degradation and robustness on real data, while the second is used to verify IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION FORENSICS AND SECURITY, VOL. 14, NO. 8, AUGUST 2021 9

whether a single shared perturbation can consistently disrupt representative selection across multiple related victim models. For completeness, additional empirical results on the direct continuous-score objective are reported in Appendix E, since that objective is not the primary model covered by our theo-retical guarantees. 

A. Experimental Setup 1) Real-data multilinear-extension summarization: We conduct experiments on CIFAR-10 [24], MNIST [25], and Fashion-MNIST [26]. Unless otherwise specified, the main numerical results are reported on CIFAR-10, while MNIST and Fashion-MNIST are used for additional validation. In each experiment, we construct I = 10 victim summarization models, and each model contains n = 50 images sampled from the raw dataset. To evaluate the effect of model size, we also report additional results for n ∈ { 100 , 200 } in the Appendix. 

2) Controlled clustered multi-target benchmark: To further isolate the attack-defense mechanism, we construct a con-trolled clustered multi-target benchmark. This benchmark is designed to capture a multi-resolution image summarization scenario in which visually similar images form semantic clus-ters and each cluster contains several near-tie representative images. Unless otherwise specified, we construct I = 10 

victim models, each containing n = 50 items organized into 5

clusters with 10 items per cluster. The similarity matrix of each victim model is normalized to [0 , 1] . Inter-cluster similarities are sampled from a low range, while intra-cluster similarities are sampled from a moderate range. Within each cluster, two representative candidates are assigned near-tie similarity scores to the remaining items. In the main benchmark, inter-cluster similarities are sampled from [0 .05 , 0.12] , ordinary intra-cluster similarities from [0 .44 , 0.56] , hub-representative similarities from [0 .76 , 0.81] , and runner-up representative similarities from [0 .75 , 0.80] .All victim models share the same clustered representative structure, while small symmetric noise is added to the sim-ilarity matrices across models. This shared-but-nonidentical construction is designed to reflect the multi-target attack set-ting: the attacker must generate a single perturbation that de-grades several related summarization models simultaneously. Moreover, the near-tie representative design prevents the attack from being dominated by a single obvious hub item, making the benchmark suitable for evaluating structure-aware attacks under the multilinear-extension objective. 

3) Feasible set and summary budgets: Following the multilinear-extension formulation, each coordinate xν ∈ [0 , 1] 

is interpreted as the probability or soft weight of selecting an item. Thus, we use the cardinality-budget relaxation 

Xk =

(

x ∈ [0 , 1] n :

> n

X

> ν=1

xν ≤ k

)

,

where k controls the expected summary size. For the real-data setting, we consider k ∈ { 5, 10 , 15 }, corresponding to summary ratios of 10% , 20% , and 30% when n = 50 . For the controlled clustered benchmark, we use k = 5 , corresponding to selecting one representative item from each cluster on aver-age. After optimization, a deterministic summary is obtained by selecting the top-k coordinates of x.

4) Evaluation protocol and metrics: We evaluate each method from both continuous and discrete perspectives. For the continuous evaluation, we report the multilinear-extension utility F (x, Ω) . For the discrete evaluation, we round the continuous solution by selecting the top-k entries of x and then evaluate the resulting summary under the discrete utility 

f (Sk(x), Ω) . All attacked and robust solutions are evaluated under the original clean similarity matrix, so that the reported degradation reflects the quality loss caused by the perturbation rather than a change in the evaluation objective itself. For the controlled clustered benchmark, this protocol additionally allows us to interpret attack effectiveness in terms of whether the selected summary loses cluster coverage or fails to preserve representative items. For attack evaluation, we report three metrics: Avg. Degra-dation , Success Ratio , and Attack Intensity . Avg. Degrada-tion measures the average decrease in clean-objective value caused by the attack. Success Ratio measures the fraction of target models whose clean-objective values are reduced by the generated perturbation. Attack Intensity is the normalized average degradation. For defense evaluation, we report Loss ,

Robustness , and Mitigation . Loss measures the clean-data utility gap between the robust solution and the greedy solution. Robustness measures the stability of the robust solution when comparing clean and attacked settings. Mitigation measures how much the defense reduces the attack effect relative to the attacked greedy solution. For the controlled clustered benchmark, we further evaluate the structural quality of the rounded summary using three indi-cators: Coverage , Hit , and Redundancy . Coverage measures how many ground-truth clusters are represented in the selected summary. Hit measures whether the summary successfully se-lects the designated hub representatives. Redundancy measures the extent to which the selected summary contains repeated information from only a few clusters. Higher coverage and hit indicate better structural quality, whereas lower redundancy indicates a more diverse and representative summary. Finally, to connect summarization-level degradation with downstream reliability, we evaluate downstream nearest-neighbor classification on the controlled clustered benchmark. Each cluster is treated as one class. For each method, we round the continuous solution by selecting the top-k items and use the selected summary as a small training set. Each clean test sample is then assigned the label of its most similar selected summary item under the clean similarity matrix. We report nearest-neighbor classification accuracy ( NN Acc. ) and downstream Recovery . NN Acc. measures the usefulness of the selected summary for downstream classification, while Recovery measures the fraction of downstream accuracy loss recovered relative to the attacked summary. 

B. Attack Performance under lp-Norm Constraints 

We organize the attack evaluation into two complemen-tary cases. The first case considers the real-data multilinear-extension summarization model, which is directly aligned IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION FORENSICS AND SECURITY, VOL. 14, NO. 8, AUGUST 2021 10              

> TABLE II ATTACK COMPARISON ON THE MULTILINEAR -EXTENSION SUMMARIZATION MODEL UNDER REPRESENTATIVE NORM CONSTRAINTS .WE USE I= 10 ,n= 50 ,k= 5 ,λ= 1 ,Kattack = 30 ,AND
> Tattack = 20 . R ANDOM PERTURBATION IS AVERAGED OVER 20
> INDEPENDENT TRIALS .

Method Avg. Deg. ↑ Succ. Ratio ↑ Intensity ↑

ℓ1-norm constraint, ϵ = 2 .0

Proposed attack 0.0329 0.60 0.000869 PGD baseline 0.0097 0.70 0.000255 Random perturbation -0.0355 0.10 -0.000938 

ℓ2-norm constraint, ϵ = 2 .0

Proposed attack 0.0548 0.70 0.001448 PGD baseline 0.0001 0.70 0.000002 Random perturbation -0.0355 0.40 -0.000508 

with our theoretical formulation and is used to examine whether structure-aware similarity perturbations can produce measurable degradation beyond gradient-based and random baselines. The second case uses a controlled clustered multi-target benchmark with explicit representative structure, which allows us to isolate the multi-target attack mechanism and interpret degradation through cluster coverage, representative hits, and redundancy. We report representative norm settings in the main text and defer additional norm- and budget-specific results to the Appendix. 

1) Real-data multilinear-extension summarization: We first evaluate the attack on the real-data multilinear-extension model. This setting is directly aligned with the theoretical ob-jective, but the multilinear extension also smooths the discrete utility over randomized subsets. Therefore, the purpose of this case is not to show a large collapse of the real-data summariza-tion model, but to test whether a structure-aware perturbation can produce measurable degradation beyond gradient-based and random baselines. 

Choice of baselines. The representative methods summa-rized in Table I differ substantially in target setting and struc-tural assumptions. In particular, the methods in [9] do not ex-plicitly address the continuous multi-target setting considered here. We therefore compare the proposed method with two directly applicable baselines: a representative gradient-based baseline for general non-convex min-max optimization [11], and a random perturbation baseline sampled from the same norm-constrained perturbation set. The random baseline serves as a sanity check for whether utility degradation is caused by optimized structure-aware perturbations rather than arbitrary bounded similarity noise. As shown in Table II, the proposed attack achieves the largest average degradation and attack intensity under both representative ℓ1- and ℓ2-norm constraints. Although PGD attains comparable or slightly higher success ratios in some cases, its degradation magnitude is much smaller. The ran-dom perturbation baseline yields negative degradation in both representative settings, indicating that arbitrary feasible pertur-bations do not reliably reduce the clean summarization utility. At the same time, the absolute degradation values are small, suggesting that the real-data multilinear-extension objective is relatively stable under bounded similarity-level perturbations. We further examine budget sensitivity in Fig. 2. The pro-posed attack algorithm becomes effective in moderate-budget regimes, while random perturbations remain weak or negative in the most informative moderate-budget region. At very small budgets, all attacks may be weak, suggesting that the multilinear-extension objective is relatively stable to small similarity perturbations. This observation motivates the con-trolled benchmark below, where the representative structure is known and the attack mechanism can be more directly examined. We also tested ℓ∞-bounded perturbations. In the multilinear-extension setting, the resulting degradation was weak and sometimes negative under the tested budgets, sug-gesting that the smoothed objective is relatively stable against small coordinate-wise similarity perturbations. We therefore report the detailed ℓ∞ results in the appendix. 

2) Controlled clustered multi-target benchmark: We next evaluate the attacks on the controlled clustered benchmark. This case is designed to isolate the multi-target attack mech-anism under a known representative structure. Each victim model contains explicit clusters and near-tie hub representa-tives, while the victim models share the same structural pattern with small model-specific noise. Therefore, this benchmark allows us to examine not only whether the objective value decreases, but also whether the selected summary loses cluster coverage, misses representative hubs, or becomes redundant. 

Utility degradation under ℓ∞ perturbations. For the controlled clustered benchmark, the strongest and most sta-ble effects are observed under the ℓ∞-norm constraint. We additionally test ℓ1 and ℓ2 attacks on a near-tie clustered variant, where the attack becomes effective after reducing the redundancy weight to λ = 0 .1 and increasing Tattack to 10. Table III reports the attack performance under ℓ∞-bounded perturbations. For low-to-moderate budgets, the proposed at-tack produces larger degradation than the PGD baseline. At 

ϵ = 0 .3, the proposed attack improves the average degradation from 5.1324 to 6.5695 , and at ϵ = 0 .5, the gap increases from 

2.8914 to 6.8044 . Both methods achieve a success ratio of 1.0,so the advantage of the proposed attack comes from larger utility drops rather than more frequent successes. When the budget increases to ϵ = 0 .7, PGD becomes stronger, indicating that the advantage of the proposed attack is most pronounced when the perturbation budget is limited and the attack must exploit the shared representative structure. 

Additional ℓ1 and ℓ2 results. Table IV reports the selected cluster-data results under ℓ1 and ℓ2 constraints. Compared with the original tight-gap clustered setting used for the ℓ∞

study, this near-tie clustered variant creates more competitive candidate summaries and therefore better exposes the effect of global-budget perturbations. Under the ℓ1-norm constraint, the proposed attack achieves positive degradation and attack intensity, while random perturbation has nearly zero effect, indicating that arbitrary feasible perturbations are insufficient to explain the observed performance drop. Under the ℓ2-norm constraint, both optimized attacks substantially reduce the clean utility, with the proposed attack achieving the largest av-erage degradation and intensity. Although random perturbation IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION FORENSICS AND SECURITY, VOL. 14, NO. 8, AUGUST 2021 11 

Fig. 2. Real-data budget sensitivity under ℓ1- and ℓ2-norm constraints. The x-axis reports log 10 ϵ, and the y-axis reports average degradation. Shaded bands indicate the standard error across the 10 victim models. Node labels show the mean average-degradation values. Random perturbation is averaged over 20 independent trials. TABLE III ATTACK COMPARISON ON THE CONTROLLED CLUSTERED MULTILINEAR -EXTENSION SUMMARIZATION BENCHMARK . W E USE 

I = 10 , n = 50 , k = 5 , λ = 0 .5, Kattack = 30 , AND Tattack = 5 .

ϵ Method Avg. Deg. ↑ Succ. Ratio ↑ Intensity ↑

ℓ∞-norm constraint 

0.3 Proposed attack 6.5695 1.00 0.1714 PGD baseline 5.1324 1.00 0.1339 0.5 Proposed attack 6.8044 1.00 0.1776 PGD baseline 2.8914 1.00 0.0755 0.7 Proposed attack 10.5072 1.00 0.2742 PGD baseline 14.0013 1.00 0.3654 

TABLE IV ATTACK COMPARISON ON THE CONTROLLED CLUSTERED MULTILINEAR -EXTENSION SUMMARIZATION BENCHMARK . W E USE THE NEAR -TIE CLUSTERED SETTING WITH I = 10 , n = 50 , k = 5 , λ = 0 .1,

Kattack = 30 , AND Tattack = 10 .

Norm ϵ Method Avg. Deg. ↑ Succ. ↑ Int. ↑

ℓ1 2 Proposed attack 1.6064 0.40 0.0390 PGD baseline 1.6064 0.40 0.0390 Random perturbation -0.0065 0.00 -0.0002 

ℓ2 5 Proposed attack 11.1272 1.00 0.2705 PGD baseline 9.1592 1.00 0.2226 Random perturbation 1.4105 1.00 0.0343 

also succeeds under this larger ℓ2 budget, its intensity is much smaller than that of the optimized attacks, showing that the structure-aware perturbation is considerably more damaging. 

Structural effects on rounded summaries. Table V further explains the utility degradation through the rounded summary structure. Under both representative budgets, the proposed attack causes larger coverage loss, stronger reduction in representative-hit ratio, and higher redundancy than the PGD baseline. For example, when ϵ = 0 .5, Proposed attack reduces coverage from 1.000 to 0.820 and hit ratio from 0.580 to 

0.320 , while increasing redundancy to 0.180 . These results show that the attack not only lowers continuous objective 

TABLE V STRUCTURAL DEGRADATION OF THE SELECTED SUMMARIES ON THE CONTROLLED CLUSTERED BENCHMARK . C OVERAGE AND REPRESENTATIVE HIT RATIO ARE HIGHER FOR BETTER SUMMARIES ,

> WHILE REDUNDANCY IS LOWER

.

ϵ Metric Clean Proposed attack PGD attack 

0.3 Cov. ↑ 1.000 0.880 0.980 

∆Cov. ↑ 0.000 0.120 0.020 Hit ↑ 0.580 0.420 0.500 

∆Hit ↑ 0.000 0.160 0.080 Red. ↓ 0.000 0.120 0.020 

∆Red. ↑ 0.000 0.120 0.020 0.5 Cov. ↑ 1.000 0.820 0.860 

∆Cov. ↑ 0.000 0.180 0.140 Hit ↑ 0.580 0.320 0.600 

∆Hit ↑ 0.000 0.260 -0.020 Red. ↓ 0.000 0.180 0.140 

∆Red. ↑ 0.000 0.180 0.140 

value, but also damages discrete summary by removing hub representatives and concentrating selections in fewer clusters. Overall, the two cases provide complementary evidence. The real-data multilinear-extension setting shows measurable but budget-sensitive vulnerability under optimized similarity perturbations. The controlled clustered benchmark further reveals when this vulnerability becomes more pronounced: when multiple victim models share a near-tie representative structure, a single bounded perturbation can systematically reduce utility and damage the rounded summary. Thus, the proposed attack is best interpreted as a structure-aware multi-target attack that is most informative in low-to-moderate budget regimes, rather than as a uniformly strongest attack across all norms and budgets. 

C. Robustness of the Defense Algorithm 

We evaluate whether the proposed robust algorithm can re-duce adversarial effects while preserving clean summarization quality. The controlled clustered benchmark is used as the main defense testbed, since its known representative structure makes robustness and mitigation effects directly interpretable. IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION FORENSICS AND SECURITY, VOL. 14, NO. 8, AUGUST 2021 12               

> TABLE VI DEFENSE COMPARISON ON THE CONTROLLED CLUSTERED BENCHMARK .WE USE THE ℓ∞-BOUNDED SETTING WITH ϵatt = 0 .5,ϵdef = 0 .02 ,
> γ= 0 .1,L= 10 ,Krobust = 30 ,AND Trobust = 5 .

Method Loss ↓ Robust. ↓ Mitig. ↑ Time ↓

Proposed robust -0.0092 0.1029 0.0826 2.99 PGD robust baseline -0.0526 0.1464 0.0757 4.80                                              

> TABLE VII REAL -DATA DEFENSE COMPARISON ON MOVIE LENS UNDER REPRESENTATIVE NORM CONSTRAINTS .
> Norm ϵatt ϵdef Method Loss ↓Robust. ↓Mitig. ↑Time ↓
> ℓ122Proposed robust 0.0005 0.0041 -0.0011 2.27 PGD robust baseline 0.0184 0.0012 -0.0180 3.03
> ℓ222Proposed robust 0.0005 0.0044 0.0009 1.24 PGD robust baseline 0.0234 0.0012 -0.0222 2.00
> ℓ∞0.1 0.1 Proposed robust 0.0205 0.0105 -0.0223 1.28 PGD robust baseline 0.0255 0.0007 -0.0283 1.86

We also report MovieLens results as a real-data sanity check for the multilinear-extension summarization model. 

1) Controlled clustered benchmark: We compare the pro-posed robust method with a representative PGD-based robust baseline under the same attack and evaluation protocol. The goal is to examine whether robust optimization can reduce clean-attacked variation, improve mitigation over the attacked greedy solution, and preserve clean-data utility. Table VI shows that the proposed robust method provides a more favorable defense trade-off on the controlled clustered benchmark. It achieves lower clean-attacked variation, slightly higher mitigation, and shorter runtime than the PGD robust baseline. Both methods have slightly negative loss values, indicating that robust optimization does not incur observable clean-utility sacrifice in this controlled setting. 

2) Real-data sanity check: We also evaluate the defense methods on the MovieLens real-data multilinear-extension model. Since this setting does not provide an explicit rep-resentative structure, the defense effect is weaker and more sensitive to the perturbation geometry; we therefore treat it as a sanity check rather than the main defense evidence. Table VII shows that the proposed robust method generally incurs smaller clean-data loss than the PGD robust baseline on MovieLens. However, the mitigation values are close to zero and depend on the norm constraint, confirming that real-data robust protection is more parameter-sensitive than in the controlled clustered benchmark. These results support the use of the controlled benchmark as the main defense evaluation while providing additional evidence that the proposed method can preserve clean utility in the real-data multilinear-extension setting. 

3) Defense Sensitivity under Different Norm Constraints: 

Table VIII reports an additional defense sensitivity study under different norm constraints on the controlled clustered bench-mark and the MovieLens real-data setting. This experiment is intended as a cross-norm sanity check rather than the main defense comparison, since the effectiveness of robust optimization depends on the geometry of the perturbation set,  

> TABLE VIII DEFENSE SENSITIVITY UNDER DIFFERENT NORM CONSTRAINTS ON THE CONTROLLED CLUSTERED BENCHMARK AND MOVIE LENS .

Norm ϵ Method Loss ↓ Robust. ↓ Mitig. ↑

Controlled clustered benchmark 

ℓ1 2 Proposed robust -0.0025 0.0472 0.0000 PGD robust 0.1723 0.0375 -0.1910 

ℓ2 2 Proposed robust 0.2352 0.1960 -0.4377 PGD robust 0.1949 0.2251 -0.4286 

ℓ∞ 0.5 Proposed robust 0.0163 0.1445 0.0187 PGD robust -0.0526 0.1549 0.0668 

MovieLens real-data setting 

ℓ1 2 Proposed robust 0.0005 0.0041 -0.0011 PGD robust 0.0184 0.0012 -0.0180 

ℓ2 2 Proposed robust 0.0005 0.0044 0.0009 PGD robust 0.0234 0.0012 -0.0222 

ℓ∞ 0.1 Proposed robust 0.0205 0.0105 -0.0223 PGD robust 0.0255 0.0007 -0.0283 

the attack budget, and the underlying similarity structure. On the controlled clustered benchmark, the proposed robust method performs favorably under the ℓ1-norm constraint: it incurs almost no clean-data loss and avoids the large negative mitigation observed for the PGD robust baseline. Under the 

ℓ2-norm constraint, however, both methods obtain negative mitigation, indicating that this setting is difficult for the tested defense algorithms and that robust optimization does not ef-fectively improve over the attacked greedy solution. Under the 

ℓ∞-norm constraint, both methods achieve positive mitigation; the proposed method has smaller clean-data loss and slightly lower robustness variation, whereas the PGD robust baseline attains larger mitigation. These results suggest that defense performance on the clustered benchmark is sensitive to the norm geometry and should be interpreted as a robustness– mitigation trade-off rather than a uniform dominance result. On the MovieLens real-data setting, the robustness values are small for both methods across all tested norms, suggesting that the real-data objective is relatively stable under the con-sidered bounded perturbations. The proposed robust method generally incurs smaller clean-data loss than the PGD robust baseline, but the mitigation values remain close to zero and can be negative. This indicates that, in the real-data setting, robust protection is more parameter-sensitive and the benefit of defense is weaker than in the structured clustered benchmark. Overall, Table VIII shows that the proposed defense can provide favorable trade-offs in representative settings, but its effectiveness is not uniform across all norm constraints. These results support our main-text focus on the controlled 

ℓ∞-bounded clustered benchmark, where the attack induces clear structural degradation and the defense effect is more interpretable. IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION FORENSICS AND SECURITY, VOL. 14, NO. 8, AUGUST 2021 13                       

> TABLE IX DOWNSTREAM CLASSIFICATION PERFORMANCE ON THE CONTROLLED CLUSTERED BENCHMARK .
> Method Coverage ↑NN Acc. ↑Recovery ↑
> Clean summary 1.000 1.000 1.000 Proposed attack 0.820 0.820 0.000 PGD attack 0.860 0.860 0.222 Proposed robust 1.000 1.000 1.000 PGD robust baseline 1.000 1.000 1.000
> Fig. 3. Downstream NN accuracy under attack and defense on the controlled clustered benchmark.

D. Downstream Evaluation on the Controlled Benchmark 

The previous metrics evaluate summarization utility and structural quality. We now examine whether such degradation also affects downstream task reliability on the controlled clustered benchmark. Following the downstream protocol de-scribed in the experimental setup, we use the rounded top-

k summaries as small training sets and evaluate nearest-neighbor classification on clean test samples. An auxiliary real-data downstream evaluation on MovieLens is provided in the Appendix, where the downstream labels are less directly aligned with the summarization objective. Table IX shows that structural degradation can translate into downstream performance loss. The proposed attack reduces cluster coverage from 1.000 to 0.820 , and NN Acc. drops accordingly from 1.000 to 0.820 . The PGD attack also reduces downstream accuracy, but the drop is smaller. After robust optimization, both robust methods recover full cluster coverage and restore NN Acc. to 1.000 . These results indicate that preserving class/cluster coverage is critical for the task-level reliability of the selected summary. Fig. 3 visually summarizes the downstream effect: attacks reduce NN accuracy, whereas robust summaries recover full task-level accuracy by restoring cluster coverage. VII. C ONCLUSION 

This paper investigated multi-target robustness evaluation for continuous data summarization under similarity-level ad-versarial perturbations. We established a DR-submodular for-mulation for a class of similarity-based summarization objec-tives via multilinear extension and m-weak monotonicity, and used this structure to develop approximation algorithms for multi-target attack generation and robust defense. Empirical results on real-data multilinear-extension summarization and a controlled clustered benchmark show measurable, budget-sensitive vulnerabilities under optimized similarity perturba-tions. The controlled benchmark further reveals that attacks can degrade rounded summary structure and reduce down-stream task performance, while robust summaries can recover task-level reliability by restoring class/cluster coverage. These findings highlight data summarization as a security-relevant upstream component in trustworthy AI pipelines. They also show that robust protection remains sensitive to data structure, perturbation geometry, and parameter choices, leaving practi-cal robust summarization as an important direction for future work. APPENDIX 

A. Proofs for Sec. III 

1) Several properties in Sec. III: For a set function f :2Ω → R, its multilinear extension F : [0 , 1] n → R is defined as 

F (x) = ES∼x[f (S)] = X

> S⊆Ω

f (S) Y

> i∈S

xi

Y

> i / ∈S

(1 − xi),

where each element i ∈ Ω is independently included in S

with probability xi. Since F is a multilinear polynomial, it is continuously differentiable and twice differentiable on [0 , 1] n.Moreover, if f is submodular, then its multilinear extension F

is DR-submodular. Indeed, for any distinct i, j ,

∂2F (x)

∂x i∂x j

= ES∼x−{ i,j } [f (S ∪ { i, j }) − f (S ∪ { i})

− f (S ∪ { j}) + f (S)] 

≤ 0.

In addition, if f is non-negative, then F is non-negative. If f

is m-weakly monotone, namely 

f (A ∪ B) ≥ mf (A), ∀A, B ⊆ Ω,

then its multilinear extension is also m-weakly monotone: 

F (x ∨ y) ≥ mF (x), ∀x, y ∈ [0 , 1] n.

Suppose f is DR-submodular on D. Then the following statements hold [22]. 1) Gradient monotonicity. If f is differentiable, then 

∇f (x) ≤ ∇ f (y), ∀x ≥ y.

2) Hessian negativity. If f is twice differentiable, then 

∂2f (x)

∂xi∂xj

≤ 0, ∀x ∈ D , ∀i, j. 

3) First-order condition. If f is continuously differentiable, then 

⟨∇ f (x), y−x⟩ ≥ f (x∨y)+ f (x∧y)−2f (x), ∀x, y ∈ D .

(10) In order to prove the smoothness of the model, we provide the definition as follows firstly. IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION FORENSICS AND SECURITY, VOL. 14, NO. 8, AUGUST 2021 14 

Definition 3 ( [27], [28]) . A function f (x, y) is said to be L-smoothness if there exists a constant L = max {Lx, L y} such that 

∥∇ xf (x1, y1) − ∇ xf (x2, y2)∥ ≤ Lx(∥x1 − x2∥ + ∥y1 − y2∥),

∥∇ yf (x1, y1) − ∇ yf (x2, y2)∥ ≤ Ly(∥x1 − x2∥ + ∥y1 − y2∥).

where ∥·∥ denotes the Euclidean norm ( l2-norm). 

Lemma 4. Let F be the multilinear extension of a bounded set function f : 2 Ω → R. Then F is continuously differentiable and L-smooth on [0 , 1] n with 

L = sup 

> x∈[0 ,1] n

∥∇ 2F (x)∥2 < ∞.

In particular, the first-order condition implies that if y ≥ x,then 

⟨∇ f (x), y − x⟩ ≥ f (y) − f (x),

which shows that DR-submodular functions are up-concave, i.e., concave along any non-negative or non-positive direc-tion [14]. We evaluate constrained DR-submodular maximiza-tion algorithms using the standard notion of approximation. 

2) Proof of Lem. 1: Proof. We first prove the properties of the discrete utility 

f (S, Ω) = r(S, Ω) − λn q(S, Ω) ,

where 

r(S, Ω) = X

> μ∈Ω

max  

> ν∈S

sμ,ν , q(S, Ω) = X

> μ∈S

X 

> ν∈S,ν ̸=μ

sμ,ν .

First, by the definition of ρΩ, for any nonempty S ⊆ Ω,

λn q(S, Ω) ≤ ρΩr(S, Ω) .

Since 0 ≤ ρΩ < 1, we have 

f (S, Ω) ≥ (1 − ρΩ)r(S, Ω) ≥ 0.

Also, f (∅, Ω) = 0 by convention. Hence f is non-negative. Second, the facility-location term r(S, Ω) is submodular. Indeed, for any A ⊆ B ⊆ Ω and e / ∈ B,

r(A ∪ { e}, Ω) − r(A, Ω) = X

> μ∈Ω



sμ,e − max  

> ν∈A

sμ,ν 



> +

,

which is no smaller than 

X

> μ∈Ω



sμ,e − max  

> ν∈B

sμ,ν 



> +

= r(B ∪ { e}, Ω) − r(B, Ω) ,

because A ⊆ B. Thus r is submodular. On the other hand, the redundancy term q(S, Ω) is super-modular. For any A ⊆ B ⊆ Ω and e / ∈ B,

q(A ∪ { e}, Ω) − q(A, Ω) = X

> ν∈A

(se,ν + sν,e )

≤ X

> ν∈B

(se,ν + sν,e ) = q(B ∪ { e}, Ω) − q(B, Ω) ,

where the inequality follows from sμ,ν ≥ 0. Therefore, − λn q

is submodular, and hence f is submodular. Third, we prove weak monotonicity. For any A, B ⊆ Ω, let 

C = A ∪ B. Since r is monotone, r(C, Ω) ≥ r(A, Ω) . Using the definition of ρΩ, we obtain 

f (C, Ω) ≥ (1 − ρΩ)r(C, Ω) ≥ (1 − ρΩ)r(A, Ω) .

Moreover, f (A, Ω) ≤ r(A, Ω) . Therefore, 

f (A ∪ B, Ω) ≥ (1 − ρΩ)f (A, Ω) .

Thus, f is mΩ-weakly monotone with mΩ = 1 − ρΩ.Finally, since F (x, Ω) is the multilinear extension of 

f (S, Ω) , the standard properties of multilinear extensions imply that non-negativity, submodularity, and mΩ-weak monotonicity of f respectively lead to non-negativity, DR-submodularity, and mΩ-weak monotonicity of F . This com-pletes the proof. 

B. Proofs for Sec. IV-A 

1) Proof of Lemmas: Proof of Lem. 3 

Proof. According to the iteration rule of Alg. 2, i.e., 

vk+1 = arg min 

> v∈P

∥v−(vk −η∇vϕ(vk, wk, {xiT (vk, wk)})) ∥2,

we obtain the following inequality for any v ∈ P :

∥vk+1 − v∥22

≤∥ vk − η∇vϕ(vk, wk, {xiT (vk, wk)}) − v∥2

=∥vk − v∥2 − 2η ⟨∇ vϕ(vk, wk, {xiT (vk, wk)}), vk − v⟩

| {z }

> := A

+ η2∥∇ vϕ(vk, wk, {xiT (vk, wk)})∥2,

which can be expressed as 

A ≥ ∥vk+1 − v∥22 − ∥ vk − v∥2

2η

− −η∥∇ vϕ(vk, wk, {xiT (vk, wk)})∥2

2 .

Combining with the convexity of the function ϕ(v, w, {xi})

w.r.t. v, we have 

ϕ(v, wk, {xiT (vk, wk)}) − ϕ(vk, wk, {xiT (vk, wk)})

≥ ∇vϕ(vk, wk, {xiT (vk, wk)}), v − vk

| {z }

> A

≥ ∥vk+1 − v∥2 − ∥ vk − v∥2

2η

− η

2 ∥∇ vϕ(vk, wk, {xiT (vk, wk)})∥2

≥ ∥vk+1 − v∥2 − ∥ vk − v∥2

2η − ηM 2

2 .

where the last inequality follows from the boundedness of 

∇vϕ as descried in Eq. (6). IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION FORENSICS AND SECURITY, VOL. 14, NO. 8, AUGUST 2021 15 

2) Proof of Theorems: Proof of Thm. 1 

Proof. Firstly, we show that the output xT is feasible. Due to dt ≤ ¯dt and the set X is down-closed convex, we have 

dt ∈ X . Combined that xT is the combination of all iterations 

dt, t = 1 , . . . T − 1. According to the smoothness of function 

F (v, x) and Eq. (5), we have the following inequality for all 

x ∈ X 

F (v, xt+1 ) − F (v, xt)

≥⟨∇ F (v, xt), xt+1 − xt⟩ − L

2 ∥xt+1 − xt∥2

> (5)

≥⟨ g(xt), 1

T dt⟩ − L

2T 2 ∥dt∥2(a)

≥ 1

T ⟨g(xt), x⟩ − L

2T 2 D2(b)

≥ 1

T ⟨g(xt), x ∨ xt − xt⟩ − L

2T 2 D2(c)

≥ 1

T ⟨∇ F (v, xt), x ∨ xt − xt⟩ − L

2T 2 D2(d)

≥ 1

T [F (v, x ∨ xt) − F (v, xt)] − L

2T 2 D2(f )

≥ 1

T [mF (v, x) − F (v, xt)] − L

2T 2 D2

where (a) is according to the Step 4 in Alg. 1, (b) follows from the fact that x+xt ≥ x∨xt for all x, xt ∈ X , and (c) is a consequence of the definition g(xt) = ∇F (v, xt) ∨ 0, (d) and 

(f ) are obtained from DR-submodularity and monotonicity, respectively. Thus, we have 

F (v, xt+1 ) − mF (v, x)

≥(1 − 1

T ) ( F (v, xt) − mF (v, x)) − L

2T 2 D2

Summing up the above inequalities over t = 0 , . . . , T − 1, we obtain 

F (v, xT ) − mF (v, x)

≥(1 − 1

T )T (F (v, x0) − mF (v, x∗)) − L

2T D2.

Furthermore, by choosing x = x∗ = arg max x∈X F (v, x),and combining with the non-negativity of F , i.e., F (v, x0) ≥

0, we have 

F (v, xT ) ≥ m



1 − (1 − 1

T )T



F (v, x) − L

2T D2

≥ m(1 − 1/e )F (v, x∗) − L

2T D2,

where the last inequality follows from (1 − 1/T )T ≥ 1/e .Therefore, by setting T = O(LD 2/ϵ ), we obtain the desired result. Proof of Thm. 2 

Proof. Firstly, we sum up all the inequalities in Eq. (7) over 

k, yielding the following 

> K

X

> k=1

ϕ(v, wk+1 , {xik+1 }) − ϕ(vk, wk+1 , {xik+1 }

≥ 12η (∥vK − v∥2 − ∥ v0 − v∥2) − KηM 2

2

≥ − DP

2η − KηM 2

2 , (11) where the last inequality comes from the bound of P, i.e., 

∥v0 − v∥2 ≤ DP for v ∈ P . Combining the constraint set of 

w with 

ϕ(v, w, {xi}) = 

> I

X

> i=1

wiF (v, xi),

we get the m(1 − 1/e )-approximate optimality of F (v, xi) as demonstrated in Thm. 1. It implies that {xi} satisfies ∀w

ϕ(v, w, {xik+1 }) ≥ m(1 −1/e ) max 

> xi∈X i

ϕ(v, w, {xi})−O ( LD 2

T ).

(12) Following Step 3 in Alg. 2 and the inequality in Eq. (12), we have 

ϕ(vk, wk+1 , {xik+1 }) = max  

> w∈W

ϕ(vk, w, {xik+1 })

≥m(1 − 1/e ) max  

> xi∈X i,w∈W

ϕ(vk, w, {xi}) − O ( LD 2

T ).

It follows from Eq. (11) that 

> K−1

X

> k=0

ϕ(v, wk+1 , {xik+1 }−

> K−1

X

> k=0



m(1 − 1/e ) max  

> xi∈X i,w∈W

ϕ(vk, w, {xi})



≥ − DP

2η − KηM 2

2 − K × O ( LD 2

T ),

which holds for all v ∈ P . In the following, we choose η = 

> 1√K

and divide both sides by K,

1

K

> K−1

X

> k=0

ϕ(v, wk+1 , {xik+1 })

− m(1 − 1/e ) 1

K

> K−1

X

> k=0



max  

> xi∈X i,w∈W

ϕ(vk, w, {xi})



≥ − DP

√K + M 2

√K − O ( LD 2

T ).

Then, combining with the convexity of ϕ(·, w, {xi}), we have 

1

K

> K−1

X

> k=0

ϕ(vk, w, {xi}) ≥ ϕ( 1

K

> K−1

X

> k=0

vk, w, {xi}).IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION FORENSICS AND SECURITY, VOL. 14, NO. 8, AUGUST 2021 16 

So we get 

1

K

> K−1

X

> k=0

ϕ(v, wk+1 , {xik+1 })

− m(1 − 1/e ) max  

> xi∈X i,w∈W

ϕ( 1

K

> K−1

X

> k=0

vk, w, {xi})

≥ − DP

√K + M 2

√K − O ( LD 2

T ),

which holds for all v ∈ P . Observing 

max 

> w∈W ,xi∈X i

ϕ(v, w, {xi}) ≥ ϕ(v, wk+1 , {xik+1 }),

and choosing v = arg min v ϕ(v, w, {xi}), we obtain 

min  

> v∈P

max 

> w∈W ,xi∈X i

ϕ(v, w, {xi})

− m(1 − 1/e ) max 

> w∈W ,xi∈X i

ϕ(¯ v, w, {xi})

≥ − DP

√K + M 2

√K − O ( LD 2

T ),

where ¯v = 1

> K

PK−1 

> k=0

vk. Furthermore, with 

K = O(DP /ϵ 2), T = O(LD 2/ϵ ),

the output of Alg. 2, ¯v satisfies 

m(1 − 1/e ) max 

> w∈W ,xi∈X i

ϕ(¯ v, w, {xi}) ≤ OPT minmax + ϵ, 

where 

OPT minmax = min  

> v∈P

max 

> w∈W ,xi∈X i

ϕ(v, w, {xi}).

This means the output ¯v is an (α, ϵ )-approximation minmax solution with α = m(1 − 1/e ) for adversarial sample genera-tion across multiple submodular models. 

C. Proofs for Sec.V 

1) Auxiliary Properties of G and Φ: Under Assumption 2, the function G(·, w, {vj }) is m-weakly monotone and DR-submodular. The gradients of G(x, w, {vj }) w.r.t. w and x

can be computed as follows: 

∇wG(x, w, {vj }) = PJj=1 ej F (x, vj ) + γ(w − 1 

> J

),

∇xG(x, w, {vj }) = PJj=1 wj ∇xF (x, vj ).

This implies that G(x, w, {vj }) is L-smooth and hence the following inequality holds: 

∥∇ xG(x, w, {vj

> 1

}) − ∇ xG(x, w, {vj

> 2

})∥

=

> J

X

> j=1

wj ∥∇ xF (x, vj

> 1

) − ∇ xF (x, vj

> 2

)∥≤

> J

X

> j=1

wj ∥vj 

> 1

− vj

> 2

∥≤ max 

> j∈[J]

∥vj 

> 1

− vj

> 2

∥, (13) where the last inequality follows from the fact that the sum of 

wj over j is equal to 1, as required by the constraint set W.To begin with, we define 

Φ( x) def 

= min  

> w∈W ,vj∈P j

G(x, w, {vj }) (14) and let (w∗(x), {vj ∗(x)}) = arg min w∈W ,vj ∈P j Φ( x). We can easily obtain the following properties regarding Φ( x).Since the proof is similar to that of Lemma 4.3 in [29], we omit it here. 

Lemma 5. Under Assumption 2, we have:  

> •

the gradient of Φ is 

∇Φ( x) = ∇xG(x, w∗(x), {vj ∗(x)}),

and the function Φ( x) is LΦ-smooth, where LΦ = ( L+ L2 

> μ

). 

> •

Define w∗(v) = arg min w∈W G(x, w, {vj }) with fixed x,the optimal solution w∗(v) is Lμ -Lipschitz continuous: 

∥w∗(v1) − w∗(v2)∥ ≤ Lμ max 

> j∈[J]

∥vj 

> 1

− vj

> 2

∥,

where v denotes the set of variables {vj }.

Under Assumption 2 and with the step size η = 1 /L in Alg. 3, we have the following inequality according to the strongly convex with respect to vj , which states that the iteration vjT (xk) satisfies 

∥vjT (xk) − vj ∗(xk)∥ ≤ (1 − μL )T / 2DPj , (15) where vj∗

(xk) = arg min v∈P j F (xk, vj (xk)) .Similarly, since G(x, w, {vj }) is γ-strongly convex and 

γ-smooth regarding w, the optimal vector w∗(x) can be determined exactly at each iterate k. The following lemma characterizes the relationship between the function values at two consecutive iteration points. 

Lemma 6. Let 

∆k = ∇Φ( xk) − ∇ Gx(xk, w∗({vjT }k), {vjT (xk)}),

where Φ is defined as in Eq. (14) . Then, under Assumption 2, the sequence {xk}k≥1 generated by Alg. 3 satisfies the fol-lowing inequality: 

Φ( xk+1 ) − Φ( xk)

≥ 1

K



mΦ( x∗) − Φ( xk) − 2DX ∥∆k∥ − LΦ

2K D2

> X



,

where x∗ is an optimal solution, Lϕ is the smoothness pa-rameter of ϕ(x), and DX is the diameter of the constraint set 

X .Proof. We begin the proof by leveraging the LΦ-smoothness of Φ( x) and 

∇Φ( xk) = ∇Gx(xk, w∗({vjT }k), {vj ∗(xk)})IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION FORENSICS AND SECURITY, VOL. 14, NO. 8, AUGUST 2021 17 

as stated in Lem. 5, it holds 

Φ( xk+1 ) − Φ( xk)

≥ ⟨∇ Φ( xk), xk+1 − xk⟩ − LΦ

2 ∥xk+1 − xk∥22

≥ ⟨∇ Φ( xk), xk+1 − xk⟩ − LΦ

2 ∥xk+1 − xk∥22

= 1

K ⟨∇ Φ( xk), dk⟩ − LΦ

2K2 ∥dk∥22 (16) 

= 1

K

D

∇Gx(xk, w∗({vjT }k), {vjT (xk)}), dk

E

+ 1

K ⟨∆k, dk⟩ − LΦ

2K2 ∥dk∥22

= 1

K ⟨[∇Gx(xk)] +, dk⟩ + 1

K ⟨∆k, dk⟩ − LΦ

2K2 ∥dk∥22

≥ 1

K ⟨[∇Gx(xk)] +, x∗⟩ + 1

K ⟨∆k, dk⟩ − LΦ

2K2 ∥dk∥22 (17) 

= 1

K ⟨[∇Φ( xk)] +, x∗⟩ + 1

K

 ⟨∆k, dk⟩ − ⟨ ¯∆k, x∗⟩

− LΦ

2K2 ∥dk∥22,

where Eq. (16) holds following Step 7 of Alg. 3, Eq. (17) follows Step 6 of Alg. 3, the second equality holds since 

∆k = ∇Φ( xk) − ∇ Gx(xk, w∗({vjT }k), {vjT (xk)}), and the third equality is due to Eq. (8). Moreover, the second inequality comes from the linear maximization in Step 6, i.e., 

⟨[∇Gx(xk)] +, dk⟩ ≥ ⟨ [∇Gx(xk)] +, x∗⟩,

where 

x∗ def 

= arg max  

> x∈X

Φ( x) = arg max  

> x∈X

min  

> w∈W ,vj∈P j

G(x, w, {vj }).

The last inequality is from x∗ ≥ 0, and the ¯∆k in the last equality is defined as 

¯∆k = [ ∇Φ( xk)] + − [∇Gx(xk, w∗({vjT }k), {vjT (xk)})] +.

Then, focusing on the first term on the right-hand side of Inequality (17), we obtain from the DR-submodular of 

F (x, vj ∗(x)) 

⟨[∇Φ( xk)] +, x∗⟩≥⟨ [∇Φ( xk)] +, x∗ ∨ xk − xk⟩≥⟨∇ Gx(xk, w∗(xk), {vj ∗(xk)}), x∗ ∨ xk − xk⟩≥G(x∗ ∨ xk, w∗(xk), {vj ∗(xk)}) − G(xk, w∗(xk), {vj ∗(xk)})

≥mG (x∗, w∗(xk), {vj ∗(xk)}) − G(xk, w∗(xk), {vj ∗(xk)})

≥mΦ( x∗) − Φ( vk). (18) Here, the first inequality follows from x∗ ∨ xk ≤ x∗ + xk

for x∗, xk ∈ X , the second one comes from the definition of 

Φ( x) in Lem. 5 and x∗ ∨ xk − xk ≥ 0, the third inequality is obtained using the DR-submodularity of G(·, w, {vj }) and Lem. 10 (iii) with x∗ ∨ xk ≥ xk, and the fourth follows from the m-weak monotonicity of G(·, w, {vj }) as along with the fact 

G(x∗, w∗(xk), {vj ∗(xk)}) ≥ Φ( x∗),

where Φ( x∗) = max x∈X min w∈W ,vj ∈P j G(x, w, {vj }) in the last inequality. Combining Eqs. (17) and (18), we obtain 

Φ( xk+1 ) − Φ( xk)

≥ 1

K (mΦ( x∗) − Φ( xk)) + 1

K

 ⟨∆k, dk⟩ − ⟨ ¯∆k, x∗⟩

− LΦ

2K2 ∥dk∥22

≥ 1

K (mΦ( x∗) − Φ( xk)) − 2DX

K ∥∆k∥ − LΦ

2K2 D2 

> X

,

where the second inequality holds by Cauchy-Schwartz in-equality, i.e., 

∥a∥∥ b∥ ≥ ⟨ a, b ⟩ ≥ −∥ a∥∥ b∥,

dk, x∗ ∈ X and ∥ ¯∆k∥ ≤ ∥ ∆k∥.In fact, for two sets A = {i : [ ∇Φ( xk)] i ≥ 0} and B = {i :[∇Gx(xk, w∗({vjT }k), {vjT (xk)})] i ≥ 0}, it is obvious that 

|[ ¯∆k]i|



= |[∆ k]i|, i ∈ A ∩ B

≤ | [∆ k]i|, i ∈ A ∪ B − A ∩ B

= 0 ≤ [∆ k]i, Otherwise Thus, we have ∥ ¯∆k∥ ≤ ∥ ∆k∥ and complete the proof. 

2) Proof of Theorem 3: Based on Lem. 6, we present the proof of Thm. 3 as follows: 

Proof. First, we bound ∥∆k∥ on the right hand side as follows 

∥∆k∥ =∥∇ Φ( xk) − ∇ Gx(xk, w∗({vjT }k), {vjT (xk)})∥≤∥∇ xG(xk, w∗(xk), {vj∗

(xk)})

− ∇ Gx(xk, w∗(xk), {vjT (xk)})∥

+ ∥∇ Gx(xk, w∗(xk), {vjT (xk)})

− ∇ Gx(xk, w∗({vjT }k), {vjT (xk)})∥≤L max 

> j∈[J]

∥vj ∗(xk) − vjT (xk)) ∥

+ γ∥w∗(xk) − w∗({vjT }k)∥≤(L + γ Lμ ) max 

> j∈[J]

∥vj ∗(xk) − vjT (xk)) ∥≤(L + γ Lμ )(1 − μL )T / 2DP ,

where the second inequality is derived based on combining the inequality in Eq. (13) and γ-smoothness of G(x, w, {vj })

w.r.t. w, the third inequality holds by combining Lμ -Lipschitz continuous of w∗ in Lem. 5 with 

w∗(xk) = arg max  

> w∈W

G(xk, w, {vj∗

(xk)}),

and the last inequality follows from (15) and DP =max j {DPj }.Therefore, by setting Q = ( L + γ Lμ ) and rearranging the inequality in Lem. 6 through subtracting mΦ( x∗) from both sides, we obtain 

Φ( xk+1 ) − mΦ( x∗) ≥(1 − 1

K )(Φ( xk) − mΦ( x∗)) (19) 

− 2QD P DX

K (1 − μL )T / 2 − L2ΦD2

> X

2K2 .IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION FORENSICS AND SECURITY, VOL. 14, NO. 8, AUGUST 2021 18 

Now, we telescope Eq. (19) over all the iterations for k =0, . . . , K − 1, which yields 

Φ( xK ) − mΦ( x∗) ≥(1 − 1

K )K (Φ( x0) − mΦ( x∗)) 

−

> K−1

X

> k=0

2QD P DX

K ρT / 2 − L2D2

> X

2K

≥(1 − 1

K )K (Φ( x0) − mΦ( x∗)) 

− 2QD X DP ρT / 2 − L2ΦD2

> X

2K ,

where ρ = 1 − μL . Furthermore, when 

K ≥ L2ΦD2

> X

2ϵ and T ≥ 2 log ρ

ϵ

2QD X DP

,

it holds that 

Φ( xK ) ≥m



1 − (1 − 1

K )K



Φ( x∗) − ϵ

≥m (1 − 1/e ) Φ( x∗) − ϵ, 

where the second inequality is because of Φ( x0) ≥ 0 by definition and (1 − 1 

> K

)K ≤ 1/e by simple calculation. 

D. Additional Experimental Details and Results 

1) Detailed Definitions of Evaluation Metrics: In this sec-tion, we provide the detailed definitions of the performance metrics used in the experiments. Unless otherwise specified, all attacked solutions are evaluated under the original clean objective, following the shared evaluation protocol adopted in the main text. For notational simplicity, we omit the explicit dependence of attacked solutions on (p, ϵ p, D ) when no confusion arises. 

a) Attack Metrics: Let xT,i denote the clean-reference solution produced by Alg. 1 for model i under the original similarity structure Ωi. For an attack type p ∈ { 1, 2, ∞} , attack budget ϵp, and feasible-set upper bound D, let xatt  

> T,i

denote the attacked solution obtained by applying Alg. 1 to the perturbed data. We evaluate the attack effect under the clean objective 

F (·, Ωi).

Success Ratio of Attack. We first define the degradation of model i under attack as 

∆att  

> i

(p, ϵ p, D ) = F (xT,i , Ωi) − F (xatt 

> T,i

, Ωi).

A target model is regarded as successfully attacked if 

∆att  

> i

(p, ϵ p, D ) ≥ 0,

that is, the attacked solution yields no larger clean-objective value than the clean-reference solution. Accordingly, the suc-cess ratio is defined as 

Ratio att (p, ϵ p, D ) = 1

I

> I

X

> i=1

1∆att  

> i

(p, ϵ p, D ) ≥ 0 .

A larger value of Ratio att (p, ϵ p, D ) indicates that the gen-erated perturbation successfully degrades a larger fraction of target models. 

Average Degradation and Attack Intensity. To measure the average attack effect over all target models, we define the average degradation as 

¯∆att (p, ϵ p, D ) = 1

I

> I

X

> i=1

 F (xT,i , Ωi) − F (xatt 

> T,i

, Ωi) .

Based on this quantity, we define the normalized attack intensity as 

Intensity att (p, ϵ p, D ) = ¯∆att (p, ϵ p, D )

> 1
> I

PIi=1 F (xT,i , Ωi) .

A larger value of ¯∆att (p, ϵ p, D ) or Intensity att (p, ϵ p, D )

indicates a stronger attack and hence greater vulnerability of the clean-reference summarization solver. 

b) Defense Metrics: We use three metrics to evaluate the robust algorithm: Loss , Robustness , and Mitigation . Let 

xrob  

> T,i

denote the solution produced by Alg. 3 under the clean setting, and let xrob ,att  

> T,i

denote the robust solution obtained under attack. We continue to evaluate all quantities below under the clean objective F (·, Ωi).

Loss. This metric measures the clean-data utility loss caused by using the robust algorithm instead of the plain greedy algorithm. It is defined as 

Loss = 1

I

> I

X

> i=1

F (xT,i , Ωi) − F (xrob  

> T,i

, Ωi)

F (xT,i , Ωi) .

A smaller value of Loss indicates that the robust algorithm preserves the clean-data utility more effectively. 

Robustness. This metric measures the sensitivity of the robust solution to attacks by comparing the robust algorithm under clean and attacked settings. It is defined as 

Robustness = 1

I

> I

X

> i=1

F (xrob  

> T,i

, Ωi) − F (xrob ,att  

> T,i

, Ωi)

F (xrob  

> T,i

, Ωi) .

A smaller value of Robustness indicates that the robust algorithm is more stable under attacks. 

Mitigation. This metric measures how much the robust algorithm reduces the degradation caused by attacks, compared with the attacked greedy solution. It is defined as 

Mitigation = 1

I

> I

X

> i=1

F (xrob ,att  

> T,i

, Ωi) − F (xatt 

> T,i

, Ωi)

F (xT,i , Ωi) .

A larger value of Mitigation indicates that the robust algo-rithm more effectively offsets the damage caused by attacks. In particular, a positive value means that, on average, the robust algorithm achieves a better clean-objective value under attack than the attacked greedy solution. 

c) Structural Metrics: For the controlled clustered benchmark, we further evaluate the structural quality of the rounded summary. Let C = {C1, . . . , C m} be the set of ground-truth clusters, and let H denote the set of designated hub representatives, with one hub representative for each cluster. Given a rounded top-k summary Sk, we report three structural metrics: Coverage , Hit , and Redundancy .IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION FORENSICS AND SECURITY, VOL. 14, NO. 8, AUGUST 2021 19 

Coverage. Coverage measures the fraction of ground-truth clusters represented by the selected summary. It is defined as 

Cov( Sk) = |{ c : Sk ∩ Cc̸ = ∅}| 

m .

A larger value of Cov( Sk) indicates that the selected summary covers more clusters and is therefore more representative at the cluster level. 

Hit. Hit measures whether the selected summary contains the designated hub representatives. It is defined as 

Hit( Sk) = |Sk ∩ H|

m .

A larger value of Hit( Sk) indicates that the summary selects more true hub representatives. 

Redundancy. Redundancy measures repeated selection within already covered clusters. It is defined as 

Red( Sk) = 1 − |{ c : Sk ∩ Cc̸ = ∅}| 

k .

A smaller value of Red( Sk) indicates that the selected sum-mary contains less repeated information from the same clus-ters. Therefore, higher Coverage and Hit values and lower Redundancy values correspond to better structural summary quality. 

d) Downstream Metrics: For the controlled clustered benchmark, we further evaluate whether the rounded summary remains useful for downstream classification. Each cluster is treated as one class, and the selected top-k summary Sk is used as a small training set. All downstream evaluation is performed on clean test samples under the clean similarity matrix, so that the reported performance reflects the usefulness of the selected summary rather than a change in the test distribution. We report two downstream metrics: NN Acc. and Recovery .

NN Acc. NN Acc. denotes nearest-neighbor classification accuracy. For each clean test sample, we assign the label of the most similar selected summary item under the clean similarity matrix. The resulting classification accuracy is reported as NN Acc. A larger value of NN Acc. indicates that the selected summary is more useful for downstream classification. 

Recovery. Recovery measures the fraction of downstream accuracy loss recovered relative to the attacked summary. It is defined as 

Recovery = Acc method − Acc attack 

Acc clean − Acc attack 

.

Here, Acc clean is the accuracy obtained by the clean sum-mary, and Acc attack is the accuracy obtained by the attacked summary. Thus, Recovery = 0 corresponds to the attacked summary, while Recovery = 1 corresponds to full recovery to the clean-summary accuracy. A larger value of Recovery indicates stronger recovery of downstream task performance. 

2) Additional Empirical Results on multilinear extension summarization: a) Real-data sensitivity on the multilinear-extension sum-marization model: Table X reports the sensitivity of real-data attacks to the perturbation budget ϵ under three norm constraints. Under the ℓ1-norm constraint, the proposed attack becomes effective when ϵ increases from 0.1 to 1, and achieves                 

> TABLE X REAL -DATA SENSITIVITY TO THE ATTACK BUDGET ϵON THE MULTILINEAR -EXTENSION SUMMARIZATION MODEL . W E USE I= 10 ,
> n= 50 ,k= 5 ,λ= 1 ,Kattack = 30 ,AND Tattack = 20 . R ANDOM PERTURBATION IS AVERAGED OVER 20 INDEPENDENT TRIALS .

Norm ϵ Method Avg. Deg. ↑ Succ. ↑ Int. ↑

ℓ1

0.1 Proposed attack -0.0158 0.20 -0.000417 PGD -0.0706 0.20 -0.001864 Rand. -0.0343 0.00 -0.000907 1Proposed attack 0.0162 0.70 0.000428 PGD 0.0084 0.70 0.000221 Rand. -0.0333 0.00 -0.000881 2Proposed attack 0.0329 0.60 0.000869 PGD 0.0097 0.70 0.000255 Rand. -0.0355 0.10 -0.000938 

ℓ2

0.1 Proposed attack -0.0363 0.10 -0.000960 PGD -0.0327 0.00 -0.000863 Rand. -0.0370 0.20 -0.000978 1Proposed attack -0.0662 0.30 -0.001748 PGD -0.0353 0.30 -0.000934 Rand. -0.0599 0.40 -0.001582 2Proposed attack 0.0548 0.70 0.001448 PGD 0.0001 0.70 0.000002 Rand. -0.0192 0.40 -0.000508 5Proposed attack 0.0548 0.70 0.001448 PGD 0.0001 0.70 0.000002 Rand. 0.1407 0.70 0.003716 

ℓ∞

0.02 Proposed attack -0.0747 0.00 -0.001973 PGD -0.0307 0.10 -0.000812 Rand. -0.0505 0.40 -0.001333 0.05 Proposed attack -0.0728 0.20 -0.001923 PGD -0.0799 0.00 -0.002110 Rand. -0.0292 0.40 -0.000770 0.08 Proposed attack -0.0618 0.40 -0.001632 PGD -0.0529 0.20 -0.001396 Rand. -0.0045 0.60 -0.000119 0.1 Proposed attack -0.0972 0.40 -0.002567 PGD -0.0284 0.20 -0.000750 Rand. 0.0093 0.60 0.000246 

the largest average degradation and attack intensity at ϵ = 2 .Although PGD obtains comparable success ratios at ϵ = 1 

and ϵ = 2, its degradation magnitude and intensity are much smaller. Random perturbation remains negative across all tested ℓ1 budgets, indicating that arbitrary feasible pertur-bations do not reliably reduce the clean summarization utility. Under the ℓ2-norm constraint, all methods are weak at small budgets, while the proposed attack becomes effective at ϵ = 2 . At the larger budget ϵ = 5 , random perturbation also produces positive degradation, suggesting that sufficiently large unstructured changes can disrupt the similarity model. However, this effect is not stable in smaller-budget regimes and does not provide a controlled multi-target attack mechanism. The ℓ∞-norm results show a different pattern. Across the tested budgets, the proposed attack and PGD attacks do not yield consistently positive average degradation, and their attack intensities remain small or negative. Random perturba-IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION FORENSICS AND SECURITY, VOL. 14, NO. 8, AUGUST 2021 20      

> TABLE XI PER -MODEL REAL -DATA ATTACK RESULTS UNDER REPRESENTATIVE NORM CONSTRAINTS .Fclean DENOTES THE CLEAN -REFERENCE OBJECTIVE ;EACH METHOD COLUMN REPORTS ATTACKED OBJECTIVE /DEGRADATION .

Norm Model Fclean Proposed attack PGD baseline Random perturbation 

ℓ1

1 41.8625 41.5888 / 0.2737 41.8251 / 0.0373 41.8688 / -0.0064 2 40.8258 41.2047 / -0.3788 41.1852 / -0.3594 40.8614 / -0.0356 3 38.7825 38.7469 / 0.0357 38.7701 / 0.0124 38.7823 / 0.0002 4 37.1577 37.0388 / 0.1190 37.4117 / -0.2540 37.2135 / -0.0557 5 35.0018 34.9913 / 0.0104 34.9269 / 0.0749 35.0040 / -0.0023 6 36.9518 36.6008 / 0.3509 36.6484 / 0.3033 37.1697 / -0.2179 7 36.2921 36.3042 / -0.0120 36.1945 / 0.0976 36.3252 / -0.0330 8 39.9055 40.0042 / -0.0987 39.6352 / 0.2702 39.9055 / 0.0000 9 36.9493 36.9793 / -0.0301 37.0650 / -0.1158 36.9580 / -0.0087 10 34.7983 34.7394 / 0.0589 34.7684 / 0.0298 34.7938 / 0.0045 

ℓ2

1 41.8625 41.5888 / 0.2737 41.8470 / 0.0154 42.1490 / -0.2865 2 40.8258 41.2047 / -0.3788 41.1852 / -0.3594 40.9139 / -0.0880 3 38.7825 38.7469 / 0.0357 38.7701 / 0.0124 38.8155 / -0.0330 4 37.1577 37.0388 / 0.1189 37.4117 / -0.2540 37.2220 / -0.0643 5 35.0018 34.9913 / 0.0104 34.9269 / 0.0749 34.9039 / 0.0978 6 36.9708 36.6008 / 0.3700 36.6484 / 0.3224 36.9617 / 0.0091 7 36.2921 36.3042 / -0.0121 36.1945 / 0.0976 36.3021 / -0.0100 8 39.9055 39.8089 / 0.0966 39.6352 / 0.2702 39.6811 / 0.2244 9 36.9493 36.9743 / -0.0250 37.1580 / -0.2087 37.0678 / -0.1185 10 34.7983 34.7394 / 0.0589 34.7684 / 0.0298 34.7216 / 0.0767 

tion becomes positive only at ϵ = 0 .1, but the magnitude is also small. This suggests that coordinate-wise bounded perturbations are less effective for the MovieLens similarity structure than the ℓ1- and ℓ2-budgeted attacks. Therefore, we treat the ℓ∞ case as an additional sensitivity analysis rather than the main real-data attack setting. Overall, the results indicate that the proposed structure-aware attack is most meaningful in low-to-moderate ℓ1- and 

ℓ2-budget regimes, where optimized perturbations outperform arbitrary feasible perturbations in both degradation magnitude and attack intensity. 

b) Per-model real-data attack results: Table XI reports the per-model attack effects on the real-data MovieLens in-stance under representative ℓ1- and ℓ2-norm constraints. The results show that the degradation is not uniformly distributed across all target models, which is expected in the multi-target setting because each victim model has a different sim-ilarity structure. Nevertheless, the proposed attack produces clear positive degradation on several individual models and achieves larger average degradation than the PGD baseline under both representative constraints. In contrast, random perturbation often yields near-zero or negative degradation, indicating that simply perturbing the similarity matrix does not reliably reduce the clean-objective value. These per-model results therefore support the aggregate results in Table II: the observed degradation is primarily due to the structured attack optimization rather than arbitrary perturbations. A negative degradation means that the attacked solution obtains a slightly larger clean-objective value than the clean reference on that individual model. This can occur because the perturbation is shared across all target models and is optimized for the aggregate multi-target objective rather than for each model independently.     

> TABLE XII AUXILIARY REAL -DATA DOWNSTREAM EVALUATION ON MOVIE LENS .EACH TOP -kSUMMARY IS USED AS THE TRAINING SET FOR A 1-NN
> GENRE CLASSIFIER ,AND THE REMAINING MOVIES IN THE SAME CLEAN FOLD ARE USED AS HELD -OUT TEST ITEMS .

Norm Method Acc. ↑ ∆Acc. ↓ Class cov. ↑

ℓ1

Clean summary 0.413 0.000 0.373 Proposed attack 0.418 -0.004 0.388 PGD baseline 0.402 0.011 0.388 Random perturbation 0.411 0.002 0.368 Proposed robust 0.382 0.031 0.373 PGD robust baseline 0.362 0.051 0.415 

ℓ2

Clean summary 0.413 0.000 0.373 Proposed attack 0.431 -0.018 0.387 PGD baseline 0.387 0.027 0.352 Random perturbation 0.412 0.001 0.374 Proposed robust 0.387 0.027 0.331 PGD robust baseline 0.398 0.016 0.331 

c) Auxiliary Real-Data Downstream Evaluation on MovieLens: We additionally conduct a lightweight down-stream evaluation on the MovieLens real-data setting. This experiment is intended as an auxiliary sanity check rather than the main downstream evidence, since the downstream genre-classification task is not directly optimized by the summariza-tion objective. For each method, we use the rounded top-k

summary as the training set for a 1-nearest-neighbor genre classifier, and use the remaining movies in the same clean fold as held-out test items. The classifier assigns each test item the genre label of the most similar selected summary item under the clean similarity matrix. We report classification accuracy, the accuracy drop relative to the clean summary, and class coverage of the selected summary. Table XII shows that the MovieLens downstream results IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION FORENSICS AND SECURITY, VOL. 14, NO. 8, AUGUST 2021 21 

do not exhibit a consistent attack–defense recovery pattern. Under the ℓ1- and ℓ2-norm settings, some attacked summaries achieve accuracy comparable to or slightly higher than the clean summary, while robust summaries do not consistently improve downstream accuracy. This behavior suggests that the lightweight genre-classification task is strongly affected by class coverage and label distribution in the selected top-

k movies, whereas the robust summarization objective is de-signed to preserve similarity-based summarization utility under perturbations rather than directly optimize genre classification. Therefore, we use this real-data downstream experiment only as an auxiliary sanity check. The controlled clustered bench-mark in the main text provides a clearer downstream evaluation because its class structure is aligned with the representative-cluster structure used in the summarization model. 

E. Additional Empirical Results on the Direct Continuous-Score Summarization Objective 

In this section, we also report empirical results on the direct continuous-score summarization objective used in earlier con-tinuous summarization formulations. This objective uses the term X

> μ

max  

> ν

xν sμ,ν ,

which provides an intuitive soft-importance interpretation but is not the primary model covered by the DR-submodular theoretical guarantee. We include these results only as supple-mentary empirical evidence that the proposed attack-defense framework can be applied beyond the main theoretical model. We conduct experiments on CIFAR-10 [24], MNIST [25], and Fashion-MNIST [26]. Unless otherwise specified, the main numerical results are reported on CIFAR-10, while MNIST and Fashion-MNIST are used for additional visual validation. In each experiment, we construct I = 10 victim summarization models, and each model contains n = 50 

images sampled from the raw dataset. Table XIII summarizes the main mathematical notations used in the experiments. Specifically, we consider three attack types, corresponding to 

l1-, l2-, and l∞-norm constraints. For p ∈ { 1, 2}, the attack budget is chosen from ϵp ∈ [0 .01 , 10] , and for p = ∞, we use 

ϵ∞ ∈ [0 .1, 1] . The feasible set of summarization solutions is 

X ∈ [0 , D ]n with D ∈ { 0.1, 1, 10 }. Additionally, i) For the proposed attack algorithm, we initialize v0 = 0 and w0 = 1 

> I

1,and set Kattack = 100 and Tattack = 30 . ii) For the robust defense algorithm, we initialize v0 = 0 and w0 = 13 1, since three attack types are considered, and use Krobust = 100 ,

Trobust = 30 , and γ = 0 .1.

a) Attack Performance under lp-Norm Constraints: We first compare the proposed attack generator with a representa-tive gradient-based baseline, and then study the effect of the attack budget and feasible-set size on attack performance. 

Comparison with a Gradient-Based Baseline. The repre-sentative methods summarized in Table I differ substantially in target setting and structural assumptions. In particular, the methods in [9] do not explicitly address the continuous multi-target setting considered here. We therefore compare our                        

> TABLE XIII KEY EXPERIMENTAL PARAMETERS AND EVALUATION METRICS .
> Symbol / Metric Meaning
> ϵpAttack budget under the ℓp-norm constraint
> Kattack Outer iterations of Alg. 2
> Tattack Inner iterations of Mgreedy in Alg. 2
> Krobust Outer iterations of Alg. 3
> Trobust Inner iterations of Alg. 3 Avg. Deg. Average degradation under attack Succ. Ratio Fraction of victim models successfully degraded Intensity Normalized attack intensity Loss Relative clean-utility change under robust optimization Robustness Relative clean-attacked variation of the robust solution Mitigation Improvement over attacked greedy under the clean objective TABLE XIV COMPARISON WITH THE GRADIENT -BASED BASELINE UNDER DIFFERENT ATTACK CONSTRAINTS (D= 1 , ϵ = 1 ,1,0.5FOR l1, l 2, l ∞).

Metric Method l1 l2 l∞

Success Ratio (%) ↑ Proposed 100 100 90 Baseline 90 100 90 Avg. Degradation ↑ Proposed 0.9583 0.9907 0.8292 Baseline 0.7933 0.9644 0.6948 Attack Intensity (%) ↑ Proposed 6.78 6.93 5.94 Baseline 5.61 6.75 4.98 

method with a representative gradient-based baseline for gen-eral non-convex min-max optimization [11], which is directly applicable to our attack setting. As shown in Table XIV, the proposed method consistently achieves larger average degradation and attack intensity across all three attack constraints. Under the l1-norm setting, it also attains a higher success ratio than the gradient-based baseline. Under the l2- and l∞-norm settings, both methods achieve the same success ratio, while the proposed method still yields slightly stronger degradation and intensity. These results show that the proposed attack generator is empirically competitive with, and in these representative settings slightly stronger than, the gradient-based baseline. 

Effect of the Attack Budget ϵp and Feasible-Set Size D

We next evaluate how attack performance changes with the attack budget and the feasible-set size. Figure 4 shows the average attack intensity under different lp-norm constraints. Overall, the attack intensity increases as ϵp becomes larger. Moreover, the effect of D depends on the attack type. Under 

l1- and l2-norm constraints, the influence of D is relatively limited. For example, when ϵp = 10 , the average attack intensity lies in a narrow range under both l1- and l2-norm constraints. In contrast, under the l∞-norm constraint, the attack intensity is much more sensitive to D. For instance, when ϵ∞ = 1 .0, the intensity grows substantially from the case 

D = 0 .1 to the case D = 10 . This suggests that the feasible-set scale plays a more important role under coordinate-wise bounded perturbations. 

Attack Success Ratio under Different Settings. Besides the average attack intensity, we also report the success ratio of attacks in Table XV. The results show that the proposed attack achieves a high success probability across a wide range of parameter settings. In particular, the success ratio approaches or reaches 100% once the attack budget exceeds a moderate threshold. For example, under the l2-norm setting, all attacks IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION FORENSICS AND SECURITY, VOL. 14, NO. 8, AUGUST 2021 22 2.0 1.5 1.0 0.5 0.0 0.5 1.0     

> log 10 1
> 3
> 2
> 1
> 0
> 1
> 2
> log 10  att
> 1
> 0.16%
> 8.55% 9.86%
> 0.68%
> 8.16% 9.62%
> 0.39%
> 8.72% 9.62%
> D=0.1
> D=1.0
> D=10.0

(a) l1-norm 2.0 1.5 1.0 0.5 0.0 0.5 1.0        

> log 10 2
> 3
> 2
> 1
> 0
> 1
> 2
> log 10  att
> 2
> 0.62%
> 5.84% 9.58%
> 2.86% 7.24% 9.62%
> 4.19% 6.91% 9.06%

(b) l2-norm 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0          

> 3
> 2
> 1
> 0
> 1
> 2
> log 10  att
> 1.49% 0.61% 1.49% 1.49%
> 0.8%
> 6.82% 9.6% 9.6%
> 4.67% 12.66% 8.82% 11.49%

(c) l∞-norm 

Fig. 4. Average attack intensity under lp-norm constraints of Alg. 2. Parameters Kattack = 100 , T attack = 30 in Alg. 1 and η refers to Tab. XVIII. “Dots” represents average attack intensity ( Intensity att (p, ϵ p, D )) of Alg. 2 under lp-norm ( p = 1 , 2, ∞) constraints. “Lines” illustrate trends of attack intensity increasing with ϵp and “ Y -axis” represents average function differences ( ¯∆att (p, ϵ p, D ))). TABLE XV ATTACK SUCCESS RATIO OF ALG . 2 UNDER lp -NORM ATTACKS 

(p = 1 , 2, ∞) ACROSS DIFFERENT D (D = 0 .1, 1, 10 ) AND ϵ VALUES .PARAMETERS : η VALUES FROM TAB . XVIII. 

D ϵp(p = 1 , 2) 

0.01 0.05 0.1 0.5 1.0 5.0 10.0 

Ratio att (p = 1 , ϵ 1, D ) under l1-norm 0.1 0.80 0.70 0.80 1.00 1.00 1.00 1.00 1.0 0.80 0.80 0.90 1.00 1.00 1.00 1.00 10.0 0.80 0.90 0.80 1.00 1.00 1.00 1.00 

Ratio att (p = 2 , ϵ 2, D ) under l2-norm 0.1 0.60 1.00 1.00 1.00 1.00 1.00 1.00 1.0 0.90 1.00 1.00 1.00 1.00 1.00 1.00 10.0 0.90 1.00 1.00 1.00 1.00 1.00 1.00 

D ϵp(p = ∞)

0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5 0.6 0.7 0.8 0.9 1.0 

Ratio att (p = ∞, ϵ ∞, D ) under l∞-norm 0.1 0.90 0.80 0.80 0.80 0.80 0.90 0.90 0.90 0.90 0.90 1.0 0.50 1.00 1.00 1.00 1.00 1.00 1.00 1.00 1.00 1.00 10.0 1.00 1.00 1.00 1.00 1.00 1.00 1.00 1.00 1.00 1.00 

succeed when ϵ2 ≥ 0.05 .

b) Robustness of the Defense Algorithm under Mixed Attacks: We now evaluate the proposed defense algorithm under mixed attack types. In particular, we focus on three questions: 1) how the regularization parameter γ affects the trade-off between clean-data utility and robustness; 2) how the proposed robust algorithm compares with a representative gradient-based robust baseline; and 3) whether the proposed robust algorithm can effectively mitigate the impact of attacks. 

Utility–Robustness Trade-off under Different γ. The proposed defense algorithm optimizes Eq. 4, where the regu-larization parameter γ controls the balance between clean-data utility and robustness. As shown in Table XVI, larger values of γ generally lead to stronger robustness. For example, under the l∞-norm attack, the robustness value decreases from 0.84 

when γ = 0 .1 to 0.22 when γ = 10 , and under the l2-norm attack it decreases from 0.43 to 0.27 . Moreover, for a fixed 

γ, the robustness gap across different attack types becomes smaller when γ is larger, suggesting that the defense becomes more balanced against mixed attacks. This behavior is consistent with the role of the regularization 

TABLE XVI PERFORMANCE METRICS OF ALG . 3 UNDER DIFFERENT γ VALUES 

(Krobust = 100 , T robust = 30 , D = 1 , ϵ = 1 , 1, 0.5 FOR l1, l 2, l ∞ ). 

Metrics Different γ values 

γ = 0 .1 γ = 1 γ = 10 

Loss (%) ↓ 2.96 2.94 4.01 Robustness (%) ↓

l∞ 0.84 0.81 0.22 

l1 0.88 0.87 0.34 

l2 0.43 0.45 0.27 

Mitigation (%) ↑

l∞ 5.82 5.86 5.52 

l1 4.34 4.36 3.89 

l2 3.86 3.88 3.22 term: a larger γ encourages the weight vector w to remain more balanced across attack types, thereby reducing the dom-inance of any single attack type and improving stability under perturbed inputs. However, Table XVI also shows that exces-sively large γ may increase the clean-data loss. Therefore, γ

induces a clear utility–robustness trade-off, and γ = 1 provides a good balance in our experiments. 

Comparison with a Gradient-Based Robust Baseline. 

The representative methods summarized in Table I differ substantially in model assumptions and attack settings. In par-ticular, existing robust DR-submodular methods such as [13], [14] mainly focus on monotone settings and do not explicitly address mixed attacks. We therefore compare our method with a representative gradient-based robust baseline that is directly compatible with the mixed-attack setting considered here. As shown in Table XVII, the proposed robust algorithm con-sistently achieves near-zero or much smaller clean-data loss and substantially smaller robustness values than the gradient-based baseline, while maintaining positive mitigation across all three attack constraints. In contrast, the gradient-based baseline suffers from much larger clean-data loss and negative mitigation in all three representative settings, indicating that it fails to consistently offset the attack effect. These results support the advantage of structure-aware robust optimization for continuous data summarization. 

Defense Effectiveness and Mitigation. We next examine whether the proposed defense can effectively reduce the im-IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION FORENSICS AND SECURITY, VOL. 14, NO. 8, AUGUST 2021 23         

> TABLE XVII COMPARISON WITH THE GRADIENT -BASED ROBUST BASELINE UNDER DIFFERENT ATTACK CONSTRAINTS (D= 1 , γ = 1 , ϵ = 1 ,1,0.5FOR
> l1, l 2, l ∞).

Metric Method l1 l2 l∞

Loss (%) ↓ Proposed -0.225 0.811 1.588 Baseline 30.66 31.53 29.58 Robustness (%) ↓ Proposed 0.664 0.401 0.649 Baseline 32.33 29.19 37.01 Mitigation (%) ↑ Proposed 6.299 6.641 6.747 Baseline -47.53 -45.40 -50.95           

> Alg. 2 outputs
> Alg. 1 outputs
> Alg. 3 outputs
> Fig. 5. Visualization results of Alg. 2 (attack algorithm), Alg. 1 (plain submodular algorithm), and Alg. 3 (robust algorithm under attack) outputs under l1-norm attack for dataset MNIST ( D= 1 ,ϵ= 1 , threshold = 0 .6).
> Alg. 2 outputs
> Alg. 1 outputs
> Alg. 3 outputs
> Fig. 6. Visualization results of attacked (Alg. 2), plain (Alg. 1 without attack) and robust (Alg. 3 with attack) outputs under l1-norm attack for dataset CIFAR-10 ( D= 1 ,ϵ= 1 and threshold=0.493).

pact of attacks. From Table XVI, all mitigation values are positive for all tested choices of γ and all three attack types. This indicates that the proposed robust algorithm consistently alleviates the degradation caused by attacks. Moreover, the mitigation results should be interpreted to-gether with the loss values. Although the defense algorithm introduces a small utility loss under clean data, the reduction in attack impact is consistently larger, showing that the robust formulation is beneficial overall. For example, when γ = 1 ,the defense achieves positive mitigation under all three norm-constrained attacks while maintaining relatively small clean-data loss. These results demonstrate that the proposed defense algorithm can effectively improve robustness against mixed attacks in continuous data summarization. 

c) Visualization Results on Multiple Datasets: We fur-ther provide qualitative visualization results for the attack algorithm (Alg. 2), the plain greedy summarization algorithm (Alg. 1), and the proposed robust defense algorithm (Alg. 3) on CIFAR-10, MNIST, and Fashion-MNIST. To generate the displayed summaries, we first normalize the continuous solution x into [0 , 1] , then convert it into a discrete selection vector using a threshold, and finally select images according to the resulting discrete solution. Figures 5–7 show that the attacked outputs differ substan-tially from the plain greedy outputs, while the robust outputs recover a noticeably larger portion of the original selection patterns. For instance, in Fig. 5, only two selected images remain unchanged after attack, whereas the robust output recovers eleven images that coincide with the plain greedy output. Similar phenomena are observed on CIFAR-10 and Fashion-MNIST, consistent with the numerical results. 

d) Additional Results for the Attack Algorithm (Alg. 2): 

This section provides additional results on the convergence                                            

> Alg. 2 outputs
> Alg. 1 outputs
> Alg. 3 outputs
> Fig. 7. Visualization results of attacked (Alg. 2), plain (Alg. 1 without attack) and robust (Alg. 3 with attack) outputs under l1-norm attacks for dataset Fashion MNIST ( D= 1 ,ϵ= 1 and threshold=0.48). TABLE XVIII VALUES OF ηIN ALG . 2 UNDER l1/l 2-NORM ATTACKS WITH VARYING
> (D, ϵ )CONFIGURATIONS .
> Dηfor different ϵvalues 0.01 0.05 0.10 0.50 1.00 5.00 10.00 0.1 0.0500 0.3000 0.8000 1.0000 1.0000 10.0000 20.0000 1.0 0.0050 0.0400 0.0500 0.0500 0.1000 0.5000 2.0000 10.0 0.0001 0.0004 0.0008 0.0030 0.0070 0.0500 0.1000

behavior of Alg. 2 and the per-model attack effects under different attack budgets. 

Convergence of the Attack Algorithm. Fig. 8 illustrates the effect of the step size η on the convergence of Alg. 2 under different attack types. When D = 1 , choosing η in the range [0 .05 , 0.15] yields stable convergence for all three norm-constrained attacks. In contrast, excessively small step sizes (e.g., η = 0 .005 for the l1-norm attack, η = 0 .0001 for the l2-norm attack, and η = 0 .001 for the l∞-norm attack) lead to non-convergence or convergence to worse solutions. This indicates that Alg. 2 is relatively insensitive to moderate changes in η, but overly small step sizes can significantly degrade convergence and solution quality. Tab. XVIII lists the η values used for the l1- and l2-norm attacks under different (D, ϵ ) settings. These values are chosen so that the norm of the generated perturbation v approaches the prescribed budget ϵ as closely as possible. For the l∞-norm attack, we use the theoretically motivated choice η =1/√Kattack with Kattack = 100 , following Theorem 2. In this case, whether each coordinate of v reaches ϵ is not itself a meaningful indicator of attack strength. 

Per-model Attack Effects under Different Attack Bud-gets. For a fixed D, with Kattack = 100 and Tattack = 30 in Alg. 2, the objective value generally decreases as the attack budget increases. In particular, all models are successfully attacked when ϵ1 ≥ 0.5 in Tabs. XIX–XXI, and when 

ϵ2 ≥ 0.05 in Tabs. XXII–XXIV, for all D ∈ { 0.1, 1, 10 }. For the l∞-norm attack, the per-model results are more sensitive to the value of D. For example, Model 7 is never successfully attacked when D = 0 .1, as shown in Tab. XXV. In contrast, when D = 10 , all models can be successfully attacked, as shown in Tab. XXVII. These results are consistent with the averaged trends reported in the main text and further illustrate how the feasible-set scale affects the strength of the l∞-norm attack. 

e) Additional Results for the Defense Algorithm (Alg. 3): 

We show several results for the performance of defense algorithm. 

Why Intermediate γ Values Yield Smaller Loss. The non-monotonic behavior of the loss with respect to γ can be understood from two extreme cases. When γ → ∞ , the regularization term in Eq. 4 forces the weights w to become IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION FORENSICS AND SECURITY, VOL. 14, NO. 8, AUGUST 2021 24 0 20 40 60 80 100 

> iterations
> 12.5
> 13.0
> 13.5
> 14.0
> 14.5
> 15.0
> F
> = 0.05
> = 0.1
> = 0.15
> = 0.005

(a) l1-norm 0 20 40 60 80 100  

> iterations
> 13.6
> 13.8
> 14.0
> 14.2
> 14.4
> 14.6
> 14.8
> 15.0
> F
> = 0.05
> = 0.1
> = 0.15
> = 0.0001

(b) l2-norm 0 20 40 60 80 100  

> iterations
> 12.5
> 13.0
> 13.5
> 14.0
> 14.5
> 15.0
> F
> = 0.05
> = 0.1
> = 0.15
> = 0.001

(c) l∞-norm 

Fig. 8. Convergence behavior of Alg. 2 under lp-norm attacks (p = 1 , 2, ∞) with varying η values. Parameters: Kattack = 100 , Tattack = 30 , and D = 1 .TABLE XIX OBJECTIVE VALUE F OF ALG . 1 UNDER l1 -NORM ATTACKS WITH VARYING ϵ1 ∈ [0 , 10] . P ARAMETERS : D = 0 .1, AND η VALUES FROM TAB . XVIII. 

ϵ1 Model 1 Model 2 Model 3 Model 4 Model 5 Model 6 Model 7 Model 8 Model 9 Model 10 

0.00 0.1511 0.1461 0.1469 0.1429 0.1436 0.1491 0.1434 0.1479 0.1484 0.1484 0.01 0.1493 0.1452 0.1454 0.1451 0.1430 0.1482 0.1469 0.1478 0.1470 0.1473 0.05 0.1500 0.1454 0.1454 0.1458 0.1437 0.1435 0.1465 0.1464 0.1474 0.1429 0.10 0.1498 0.1450 0.1420 0.1452 0.1386 0.1479 0.1460 0.1472 0.1422 0.1420 0.50 0.1373 0.1334 0.1314 0.1327 0.1320 0.1328 0.1343 0.1368 0.1355 0.1359 1.00 0.1365 0.1319 0.1352 0.1359 0.1296 0.1326 0.1324 0.1351 0.1368 0.1334 5.00 0.1342 0.1308 0.1317 0.1316 0.1294 0.1315 0.1326 0.1350 0.1333 0.1350 10.00 0.1336 0.1303 0.1310 0.1314 0.1308 0.1346 0.1304 0.1344 0.1328 0.1335 TABLE XX OBJECTIVE VALUES F OF ALG . 1 UNDER l1 -NORM ATTACKS WITH VARYING ϵ1 ∈ [0 , 10] . P ARAMETERS : D = 1 , η VALUES FROM TAB . XVIII. 

ϵ1 Model 1 Model 2 Model 3 Model 4 Model 5 Model 6 Model 7 Model 8 Model 9 Model 10 

0.00 14.7757 14.2996 14.3820 13.9502 14.0592 14.5925 13.9490 14.4686 14.5209 14.5194 0.01 14.7201 13.8402 14.3332 14.3451 13.6146 14.5270 14.3923 13.9039 14.4224 14.4154 0.05 14.4612 14.2015 14.1490 14.2326 13.9193 14.1123 14.2087 14.1635 13.7858 13.7707 0.10 14.2288 13.7346 14.2672 13.7487 13.5319 14.0480 13.9597 13.8832 13.8181 14.2858 0.50 13.6322 13.0018 13.1876 13.1219 12.8331 13.0850 13.2278 13.2038 13.3297 13.1609 1.00 13.1692 12.8830 12.8003 13.0511 12.7220 13.1636 13.0931 13.2244 12.8591 13.1685 5.00 13.1553 12.8361 13.0886 12.8006 12.7337 12.9865 12.8367 13.0297 12.7035 13.0768 10.00 12.9570 12.9438 12.8959 13.1496 12.8766 12.9447 12.7274 13.2199 12.8900 13.0697 TABLE XXI OBJECTIVE VALUES F OF ALG . 1 UNDER l1 -NORM ATTACKS WITH VARYING ϵ1 ∈ [0 , 10] . P ARAMETERS : D = 10 , η VALUES FROM TAB . XVIII. 

ϵ1 Model 1 Model 2 Model 3 Model 4 Model 5 Model 6 Model 7 Model 8 Model 9 Model 10 

0.00 1474.2324 1426.8492 1435.0023 1391.8554 1402.8959 1410.4395 1391.6993 1443.6483 1448.8861 1448.7191 0.01 1462.9098 1416.6063 1422.4803 1376.0069 1398.6040 1442.1429 1415.4935 1425.0280 1424.2331 1433.6294 0.05 1449.6008 1407.9932 1423.4187 1383.4185 1345.3509 1443.2330 1375.9175 1383.7270 1373.5448 1433.1648 0.10 1416.3975 1364.5970 1371.7884 1375.6148 1353.9248 1439.1516 1418.7915 1418.2876 1373.6033 1428.7677 0.50 1344.7070 1302.4760 1289.9080 1302.3589 1269.6011 1302.7427 1305.0936 1330.5593 1257.7889 1321.0485 1.00 1320.7759 1308.1058 1287.8753 1299.5853 1284.2200 1299.0918 1289.3330 1340.8883 1308.6752 1324.1519 5.00 1286.7390 1272.4438 1285.6346 1283.5320 1285.0912 1273.1899 1296.5136 1306.5048 1271.8013 1296.2556 10.00 1306.1874 1281.9626 1285.0219 1288.2721 1274.9180 1282.1630 1281.8991 1300.2769 1285.9448 1311.3829 

nearly uniform across attack types. As a result, the update of 

x is affected almost equally by all attacks, which may lead to a more conservative solution and hence larger clean-data loss. In contrast, when γ → 0, the objective is dominated by the worst-performing attack type, so that one weight tends to approach 1 while the others approach 0. In this case, the update of x is driven almost entirely by a single attack model, which may also degrade clean-data performance. Therefore, both extremes may increase the loss, while an intermediate γ

often provides a better balance. 

Per-model Results of the Robust Algorithm. Besides the averaged metrics, we also report the objective values for each individual model under different settings. From Tab. XXVIII to Tab. XXXVI, the results consistently satisfy Fp(¯ xT , Ωi) ≥

F rob 

p (¯ xT , Ωi) ≥ F rob ,att 

p (¯ xT , Ωi(v)) ≥ F att 

p (¯ xT , Ωi(v)) .

This shows that the robust algorithm introduces only moderate loss under clean data, while consistently improving over the attacked greedy solution under adversarial perturbations. IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION FORENSICS AND SECURITY, VOL. 14, NO. 8, AUGUST 2021 25 

TABLE XXII OBJECTIVE VALUES F OF ALG . 1 UNDER l2 -NORM ATTACKS WITH VARYING ϵ2 ∈ [0 , 10] . P ARAMETERS : D = 0 .1, η VALUES FROM TAB . XVIII. 

ϵ2 Model 1 Model 2 Model 3 Model 4 Model 5 Model 6 Model 7 Model 8 Model 9 Model 10 

0.00 0.1511 0.1461 0.1469 0.1429 0.1436 0.1491 0.1434 0.1479 0.1484 0.1484 0.01 0.1456 0.1453 0.1421 0.1465 0.1436 0.1484 0.1435 0.1479 0.1479 0.1477 0.05 0.1479 0.1444 0.1402 0.1413 0.1385 0.1413 0.1402 0.1464 0.1464 0.1471 0.10 0.1482 0.1437 0.1430 0.1403 0.1370 0.1425 0.1397 0.1433 0.1387 0.1445 0.50 0.1455 0.1363 0.1368 0.1362 0.1340 0.1406 0.1355 0.1369 0.1385 0.1417 1.00 0.1472 0.1359 0.1383 0.1343 0.1358 0.1392 0.1360 0.1364 0.1369 0.1422 5.00 0.1353 0.1321 0.1345 0.1334 0.1310 0.1334 0.1344 0.1366 0.1322 0.1345 10.00 0.1341 0.1313 0.1320 0.1326 0.1329 0.1343 0.1304 0.1350 0.1306 0.1337 TABLE XXIII OBJECTIVE VALUES F OF ALG . 1 UNDER l2 -NORM ATTACKS WITH VARYING ϵ2 ∈ [0 , 10] . P ARAMETERS : D = 1 , η VALUES FROM TAB . XVIII. 

ϵ2 Model 1 Model 2 Model 3 Model 4 Model 5 Model 6 Model 7 Model 8 Model 9 Model 10 

0.00 14.7757 14.2996 14.3820 13.9502 14.0592 14.5925 13.9490 14.4686 14.5209 14.5194 0.01 14.3609 14.0326 13.5897 14.0134 13.4768 13.5853 13.7545 14.1583 14.3729 14.0457 0.05 13.3674 13.8002 13.1430 13.2985 13.0270 13.4715 13.6194 13.8901 13.6847 13.8387 0.1 13.8550 13.3263 13.4509 13.2885 13.4143 13.3043 13.3568 14.1224 13.4534 13.4339 0.5 13.2274 13.3292 13.3167 13.2822 13.0968 13.3608 13.3767 13.4204 13.3758 13.2969 1.0 13.6029 13.3840 13.8898 13.6794 13.2521 13.5950 13.2556 13.5484 13.1153 13.4189 5.0 13.1166 12.9472 13.0968 12.9297 12.8962 13.1894 12.9019 13.1366 12.9823 13.1764 10.0 12.9900 13.1097 12.9613 12.8142 12.7174 13.0276 12.8289 13.1637 13.0128 13.0594 TABLE XXIV OBJECTIVE VALUES F OF ALG . 1 UNDER l2 -NORM ATTACKS WITH VARYING ϵ2 ∈ [0 , 10] . P ARAMETERS : D = 10 , η VALUES FROM TAB . XVIII. 

ϵ2 Model 1 Model 2 Model 3 Model 4 Model 5 Model 6 Model 7 Model 8 Model 9 Model 10 

0.00 1474.2324 1426.8492 1435.0023 1391.8554 1402.8959 1410.4395 1391.6993 1443.6483 1448.8861 1448.7191 0.01 1393.3562 1360.0638 1374.8273 1364.2667 1322.6239 1414.8718 1324.4119 1370.1080 1370.7363 1378.8443 0.05 1383.6321 1383.4909 1330.0605 1307.5915 1314.5249 1349.5608 1320.0215 1362.2623 1339.1132 1404.0497 0.10 1410.6906 1314.6269 1332.8700 1377.2207 1345.0731 1363.3326 1340.2059 1419.6103 1345.4399 1403.3197 0.50 1350.5515 1332.4207 1305.3593 1304.0124 1300.3575 1336.1150 1331.5484 1346.6761 1348.2639 1329.5303 1.00 1363.8197 1366.5286 1338.7542 1331.9835 1367.6243 1336.4774 1305.5736 1395.5431 1336.7558 1380.1395 5.00 1302.3481 1292.5827 1293.3264 1294.2322 1302.1482 1298.1031 1268.5876 1322.8287 1303.6870 1323.0778 10.00 1328.7872 1275.8841 1304.6443 1283.5058 1298.7070 1306.2990 1276.3863 1310.0792 1272.1141 1322.5080 TABLE XXV OBJECTIVE VALUES F OF ALG . 1 UNDER l∞ -NORM ATTACKS WITH VARYING ϵ∞ ∈ [0 , 1] . P ARAMETERS : D = 0 .1, η = 0 .1.

ϵ∞ Model 1 Model 2 Model 3 Model 4 Model 5 Model 6 Model 7 Model 8 Model 9 Model 10 

0.00 0.1511 0.1461 0.1469 0.1429 0.1436 0.1491 0.1434 0.1479 0.1484 0.1484 0.10 0.1479 0.1449 0.1403 0.1411 0.1380 0.1466 0.1458 0.1465 0.1476 0.1472 0.20 0.1482 0.1455 0.1450 0.1462 0.1387 0.1482 0.1447 0.1474 0.1473 0.1475 0.30 0.1482 0.1455 0.1450 0.1462 0.1387 0.1482 0.1447 0.1474 0.1473 0.1475 0.40 0.1482 0.1455 0.1450 0.1462 0.1387 0.1482 0.1447 0.1474 0.1473 0.1475 0.50 0.1482 0.1455 0.1450 0.1462 0.1387 0.1482 0.1447 0.1474 0.1473 0.1475 0.60 0.1479 0.1449 0.1403 0.1411 0.1380 0.1466 0.1458 0.1465 0.1476 0.1472 0.70 0.1479 0.1449 0.1403 0.1411 0.1380 0.1466 0.1458 0.1465 0.1476 0.1472 0.80 0.1479 0.1449 0.1403 0.1411 0.1380 0.1466 0.1458 0.1465 0.1476 0.1472 0.90 0.1479 0.1449 0.1403 0.1411 0.1380 0.1466 0.1458 0.1465 0.1476 0.1472 1.00 0.1479 0.1449 0.1403 0.1411 0.1380 0.1466 0.1458 0.1465 0.1476 0.1472 

Hence, the per-model results support the same conclusion as the averaged metrics: Alg. 3 provides effective robustness with acceptable utility loss. IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION FORENSICS AND SECURITY, VOL. 14, NO. 8, AUGUST 2021 26 

TABLE XXVI OBJECTIVE VALUES F OF ALG . 1 UNDER l∞ -NORM ATTACKS WITH VARYING ϵ∞ ∈ [0 , 1] . P ARAMETERS : D = 1 , η = 0 .1.

ϵ∞ Model 1 Model 2 Model 3 Model 4 Model 5 Model 6 Model 7 Model 8 Model 9 Model 10 

0.00 14.7757 14.2996 14.3820 13.9502 14.0592 14.5925 13.9490 14.4686 14.5209 14.5194 0.10 14.7200 13.8373 13.8269 14.3320 13.6178 14.6066 13.9508 14.4725 14.5209 14.4869 0.20 14.7557 13.5609 13.6631 13.5879 13.5796 13.9308 13.7069 14.0067 13.9347 13.8778 0.30 14.7441 13.5926 13.5036 13.4356 12.7464 13.5099 13.4836 13.7012 13.0577 14.2977 0.40 13.2733 13.0266 13.0663 13.2455 12.9559 13.4531 13.7557 13.1864 13.5648 14.1677 0.50 13.1596 12.9217 12.8158 12.8778 12.8955 12.8753 13.0534 13.0272 12.6506 13.2123 0.60 13.1162 12.9490 13.0452 12.8062 12.8238 13.0343 12.8726 13.1176 12.8893 13.2046 0.70 13.0891 12.9490 13.0252 12.8062 12.7869 13.0343 12.8541 13.1074 12.9676 13.0981 0.80 13.0891 12.9490 13.0252 12.8062 12.7869 13.0343 12.8541 13.1074 12.9676 13.0981 0.90 13.0891 12.9490 13.0252 12.8062 12.7869 13.0343 12.8541 13.1074 12.9676 13.0981 1.00 13.0891 12.9490 13.0252 12.8062 12.7869 13.0343 12.8541 13.1074 12.9676 13.0981 TABLE XXVII OBJECTIVE VALUES F OF ALG . 1 UNDER l∞ -NORM ATTACKS WITH VARYING ϵ∞ ∈ [0 , 1] . P ARAMETERS : D = 10 , η = 0 .1.

ϵ∞ Model 1 Model 2 Model 3 Model 4 Model 5 Model 6 Model 7 Model 8 Model 9 Model 10 

0.00 1474.2324 1426.8492 1435.0023 1391.8554 1402.8959 1410.4395 1391.6993 1443.6483 1448.8861 1448.7191 0.10 1356.1932 1367.8265 1336.5555 1332.4540 1348.5302 1371.4058 1336.8640 1394.6237 1379.7231 1380.9254 0.20 1299.1402 1318.0910 1281.0421 1293.9322 1290.9650 1298.2420 1298.5391 1316.1446 1321.3482 1314.8729 0.30 1330.0928 1236.7211 1291.2222 1252.3489 1297.1734 1259.0189 1276.5407 1312.2521 1313.2799 1331.8045 0.40 1241.2052 1302.3915 1282.0595 1273.9369 1163.9825 1110.1221 1219.5449 1310.2218 1317.0013 1246.7736 0.50 1323.7156 1289.5550 1255.3676 1283.3641 1236.2072 1288.7349 1293.3822 1322.7892 1210.6488 1302.7711 0.60 1315.1328 1290.6897 1221.0778 1312.1990 1299.5189 1169.9733 1250.7673 1262.1856 1305.9338 1309.6077 0.70 1302.2765 1311.2195 1295.3673 1299.9777 1312.2751 1306.1988 1301.0384 1306.3242 1302.1175 1273.0084 0.80 1345.0386 1235.4823 1293.4413 1308.1246 1229.8006 1243.8061 1229.2508 1237.6780 1237.8233 1329.4045 0.90 1303.7923 1294.7092 1283.0093 1184.0212 1300.7484 1302.7943 1283.7163 1302.2064 1313.1154 1332.1812 1.00 1323.4922 1234.0211 1288.2501 1247.8889 1237.5296 1282.0559 1163.0216 1313.1526 1225.3747 1321.0384 TABLE XXVIII OBJECTIVE VALUES F UNDER l1 -NORM ATTACKS WITH γ = 0 .1.PARAMETERS : Krobust = 100 , T robust = 30 , D = 1 ). 

Model Fp(¯ xT , Ωi) F rob  

> p

(¯ xT , Ωi) F rob ,att  

> p

(¯ xT , Ωi(v)) F att  

> p

(¯ xT , Ωi(v)) Model 1 14.7757 14.2978 14.0910 13.6322 

Model 2 14.2996 13.8470 13.7345 13.0018 

Model 3 14.3820 13.8146 13.7065 13.1876 

Model 4 13.9502 13.8111 13.6874 13.1219 

Model 5 14.0592 13.6137 13.5729 12.8331 

Model 6 14.5925 14.0321 13.8776 13.0850 

Model 7 13.9490 13.8161 13.6908 13.2278 

Model 8 14.4686 14.0322 13.9061 13.2038 

Model 9 14.5209 13.9969 13.8094 13.3297 

Model 10 14.5194 13.9817 13.9314 13.1609 

TABLE XXIX OBJECTIVE VALUES F UNDER l2 -NORM ATTACKS WITH γ = 0 .1.PARAMETERS : Krobust = 100 , T robust = 30 , D = 1 .

Model Fp(¯ xT , Ωi) F rob  

> p

(¯ xT , Ωi) F rob ,att  

> p

(¯ xT , Ωi(v)) F att  

> p

(¯ xT , Ωi(v)) Model 1 14.7757 14.2978 14.1284 13.2274 

Model 2 14.2996 13.847 13.7828 13.3292 

Model 3 14.382 13.8146 13.7803 13.3167 

Model 4 13.9502 13.8111 13.7707 13.2822 

Model 5 14.0592 13.6137 13.6071 13.0968 

Model 6 14.5925 14.0321 13.9337 13.3608 

Model 7 13.949 13.8161 13.773 13.3767 

Model 8 14.4686 14.0322 13.9721 13.4204 

Model 9 14.5209 13.9969 13.9144 13.3758 

Model 10 14.5194 13.9817 13.9759 13.2969 

TABLE XXX OBJECTIVE VALUES F UNDER l∞ -NORM ATTACKS WITH γ = 0 .1.PARAMETERS : Krobust = 100 , T robust = 30 , D = 0 .5.

Model Fp(¯ xT , Ωi) F rob  

> p

(¯ xT , Ωi) F rob ,att  

> p

(¯ xT , Ωi(v)) F att  

> p

(¯ xT , Ωi(v)) Model 1 14.7757 14.2978 14.1048 13.0891 

Model 2 14.2996 13.847 13.7329 12.949 

Model 3 14.382 13.8146 13.7147 13.0252 

Model 4 13.9502 13.8111 13.6962 12.8062 

Model 5 14.0592 13.6137 13.5727 12.7869 

Model 6 14.5925 14.0321 13.8854 13.0343 

Model 7 13.949 13.8161 13.6943 12.8541 

Model 8 14.4686 14.0322 13.9157 13.1074 

Model 9 14.5209 13.9969 13.82 12.9676 

Model 10 14.5194 13.9817 13.9353 13.0981 

TABLE XXXI OBJECTIVE VALUES F UNDER l1 -NORM ATTACKS WITH γ = 1 .PARAMETERS : Krobust = 100 , T robust = 30 , D = 1) .

Model Fp(¯ xT , Ωi) F rob  

> p

(¯ xT , Ωi) F rob ,att  

> p

(¯ xT , Ωi) F att  

> p

(¯ xT , Ωi(v)) Model 1 14.7757 14.2299 14.0945 13.6322 

Model 2 14.2996 13.7697 13.7388 13.0018 

Model 3 14.382 13.8609 13.7211 13.1876 

Model 4 13.9502 13.8021 13.6995 13.1219 

Model 5 14.0592 13.6241 13.5714 12.8331 

Model 6 14.5925 14.0642 13.8867 13.085 

Model 7 13.949 13.806 13.6907 13.2278 

Model 8 14.4686 14.0595 13.917 13.2038 

Model 9 14.5209 14.012 13.8016 13.3297 

Model 10 14.5194 14.0363 13.9221 13.1609 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION FORENSICS AND SECURITY, VOL. 14, NO. 8, AUGUST 2021 27 

TABLE XXXII OBJECTIVE VALUES F UNDER l2 -NORM ATTACKS WITH γ = 1 .PARAMETERS : Krobust = 100 , T robust = 30 , D = 1) .

Model Fp(¯ xT , Ωi) F rob  

> p

(¯ xT , Ωi) F rob ,att  

> p

(¯ xT , Ωi(v)) F att  

> p

(¯ xT , Ωi(v)) Model 1 14.7757 14.2299 14.1512 13.2274 

Model 2 14.2996 13.7697 13.7972 13.3292 

Model 3 14.382 13.8609 13.788 13.3167 

Model 4 13.9502 13.8021 13.7607 13.2822 

Model 5 14.0592 13.6241 13.6126 13.0968 

Model 6 14.5925 14.0642 13.9551 13.3608 

Model 7 13.949 13.806 13.7672 13.3767 

Model 8 14.4686 14.0595 13.969 13.4204 

Model 9 14.5209 14.012 13.908 13.3758 

Model 10 14.5194 14.0363 13.9863 13.2969 

TABLE XXXIII OBJECTIVE VALUES F UNDER l∞ -NORM ATTACKS WITH γ = 1 .PARAMETERS : Krobust = 100 , T robust = 30 , D = 0 .5) .

Model Fp(¯ xT , Ωi) F rob  

> p

(¯ xT , Ωi) F rob ,att  

> p

(¯ xT , Ωi(v)) F att  

> p

(¯ xT , Ωi(v)) Model 1 14.7757 14.2299 14.1095 13.0891 

Model 2 14.2996 13.7697 13.7507 12.949 

Model 3 14.382 13.8609 13.7181 13.0252 

Model 4 13.9502 13.8021 13.7095 12.8062 

Model 5 14.0592 13.6241 13.5799 12.7869 

Model 6 14.5925 14.0642 13.8915 13.0343 

Model 7 13.949 13.806 13.7061 12.8541 

Model 8 14.4686 14.0595 13.922 13.1074 

Model 9 14.5209 14.012 13.8126 12.9676 

Model 10 14.5194 14.0363 13.9329 13.0981 

TABLE XXXIV OBJECTIVE VALUES F UNDER l1 -NORM ATTACKS WITH γ = 10 .PARAMETERS : Krobust = 100 , T robust = 30 , D = 1) .

Model Fp(¯ xT , Ωi) F rob  

> p

(¯ xT , Ωi) F rob ,att  

> p

(¯ xT , Ωi(v)) F att  

> p

(¯ xT , Ωi(v)) Model 1 14.7757 14.0579 14.0259 13.6322 

Model 2 14.2996 13.7544 13.6889 13.0018 

Model 3 14.382 13.6549 13.6758 13.1876 

Model 4 13.9502 13.6953 13.5945 13.1219 

Model 5 14.0592 13.5546 13.5416 12.8331 

Model 6 14.5925 13.7843 13.8238 13.085 

Model 7 13.949 13.6951 13.5806 13.2278 

Model 8 14.4686 13.885 13.9145 13.2038 

Model 9 14.5209 13.7452 13.7495 13.3297 

Model 10 14.5194 13.9167 13.8738 13.1609 

TABLE XXXV OBJECTIVE VALUES F UNDER l2 -NORM ATTACKS WITH γ = 10 .PARAMETERS : Krobust = 100 , T robust = 30 , D = 1) .

Model Fp(¯ xT , Ωi) F rob  

> p

(¯ xT , Ωi) F rob ,att  

> p

(¯ xT , Ωi(v)) F att  

> p

(¯ xT , Ωi(v)) Model 1 14.7757 14.0579 14.0914 13.2274 

Model 2 14.2996 13.7544 13.7465 13.3292 

Model 3 14.382 13.6549 13.7477 13.3167 

Model 4 13.9502 13.6953 13.6913 13.2822 

Model 5 14.0592 13.5546 13.5397 13.0968 

Model 6 14.5925 13.7843 13.7952 13.3608 

Model 7 13.949 13.6951 13.7238 13.3767 

Model 8 14.4686 13.885 13.9524 13.4204 

Model 9 14.5209 13.7452 13.8496 13.3758 

Model 10 14.5194 13.9167 13.9218 13.2969 

TABLE XXXVI OBJECTIVE VALUES F UNDER l∞ -NORM ATTACKS WITH γ = 10 .PARAMETERS : Krobust = 100 , T robust = 30 , D = 0 .5) .

Model Fp(¯ xT , Ωi) F rob  

> p

(¯ xT , Ωi) F rob ,att  

> p

(¯ xT , Ωi(v)) F att  

> p

(¯ xT , Ωi(v)) Model 1 14.7757 14.0579 14.0508 13.0891 

Model 2 14.2996 13.7544 13.7812 12.949 

Model 3 14.382 13.6549 13.7406 13.0252 

Model 4 13.9502 13.6953 13.7374 12.8062 

Model 5 14.0592 13.5546 13.5332 12.7869 

Model 6 14.5925 13.7843 13.8321 13.0343 

Model 7 13.949 13.6951 13.6681 12.8541 

Model 8 14.4686 13.885 13.8686 13.1074 

Model 9 14.5209 13.7452 13.7479 12.9676 

Model 10 14.5194 13.9167 13.8852 13.0981 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION FORENSICS AND SECURITY, VOL. 14, NO. 8, AUGUST 2021 28 

REFERENCES [1] L. Lov´ asz, “Submodular functions and convexity,” Mathematical Pro-gramming The State of the Art: Bonn 1982 , pp. 235–257, 1983. [2] C. Chekuri, J. Vondr´ ak, and R. Zenklusen, “Submodular function maximization via the multilinear relaxation and contention resolution schemes,” in Proceedings of the forty-third annual ACM symposium on Theory of computing , 2011, pp. 783–792. [3] T. Soma, N. Kakimura, K. Inaba, and K.-i. Kawarabayashi, “Optimal budget allocation: Theoretical guarantee and efficient algorithm,” in 

International Conference on Machine Learning . PMLR, 2014, pp. 351–359. [4] J. Schreiber, J. Bilmes, and W. S. Noble, “apricot: Submodular selec-tion for data summarization in python,” Journal of Machine Learning Research , vol. 21, no. 161, pp. 1–6, 2020. [5] V. Kaushal, G. Ramakrishnan, and R. Iyer, “Submodlib: A submodular optimization library,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2202.10680 , 2022. [6] Y. Suo, S. Chai, R. Chai, Z.-H. Pang, Y. Xia, and G.-P. Liu, “Security defense of large-scale networks under false data injection attacks: An at-tack detection scheduling approach,” IEEE Transactions on Information Forensics and Security , vol. 19, pp. 1908–1921, 2024. [7] G. Tolias, F. Radenovic, and O. Chum, “Targeted mismatch adversarial attack: Query with a flower to retrieve the tower,” in Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF international conference on computer vision , 2019, pp. 5037–5046. [8] L. Chen, Y. Xu, F. Xie, M. Huang, and Z. Zheng, “Data poisoning attacks on neighborhood-based recommender systems,” Transactions on Emerging Telecommunications Technologies , vol. 32, no. 6, p. e3872, 2021. [9] A. Adibi, A. Mokhtari, and H. Hassani, “Minimax optimization: The case of convex-submodular,” in International Conference on Artificial Intelligence and Statistics . PMLR, 2022, pp. 3556–3580. [10] Q. Lei, L. Wu, P.-Y. Chen, A. Dimakis, I. S. Dhillon, and M. J. Wit-brock, “Discrete adversarial attacks and submodular optimization with applications to text classification,” Proceedings of Machine Learning and Systems , vol. 1, pp. 146–165, 2019. [11] J. Wang, T. Zhang, S. Liu, P.-Y. Chen, J. Xu, M. Fardad, and B. Li, “Adversarial attack generation empowered by min-max optimization,” 

Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , vol. 34, pp. 16 020–16 033, 2021. [12] M. Staib and S. Jegelka, “Robust budget allocation via continuous sub-modular functions,” in International Conference on Machine Learning .PMLR, 2017, pp. 3230–3240. [13] D. Lee, N. Ho-Nguyen, and D. Lee, “Non-smooth and holder-smooth submodular maximization,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2210.06061 , 2022. [14] Y. Lian, X. Wang, D. Xu, and Z. Zhao, “Zeroth-order stochastic approximation algorithms for dr-submodular optimization,” Journal of Machine Learning Research , vol. 25, no. 391, pp. 1–55, 2024. [15] Q. Liu, C. Zhao, M. Liu, R. Deng, and P. Cheng, “Submodularity-based false data injection attack strategy in dc microgrids,” IEEE Transactions on Information Forensics and Security , vol. 20, pp. 2342–2356, 2025. [16] L. Zhu, Q. Bao, and Z. Zhang, “Measures and optimization for robust-ness and vulnerability in disconnected networks,” IEEE Transactions on Information Forensics and Security , vol. 18, pp. 3350–3362, 2023. [17] A. Krause, H. B. McMahan, C. Guestrin, and A. Gupta, “Robust sub-modular observation selection,” Journal of Machine Learning Research ,vol. 9, no. 12, 2008. [18] W. Chen, T. Lin, Z. Tan, M. Zhao, and X. Zhou, “Robust influence maximization,” in Proceedings of the 22nd ACM SIGKDD international conference on Knowledge discovery and data mining , 2016, pp. 795– 804. [19] X. He and D. Kempe, “Stability and robustness in influence maximiza-tion,” ACM Transactions on Knowledge Discovery from Data (TKDD) ,vol. 12, no. 6, pp. 1–34, 2018. [20] B. Wilder, “Equilibrium computation and robust optimization in zero sum games with submodular structure,” Proceedings of the AAAI Con-ference on Artificial Intelligence , vol. 32, no. 1, 2018. [21] M. Staib, B. Wilder, and S. Jegelka, “Distributionally robust submodular maximization,” in The 22nd International Conference on Artificial Intelligence and Statistics . PMLR, 2019, pp. 506–516. [22] A. A. Bian, B. Mirzasoleiman, J. Buhmann, and A. Krause, “Guaranteed non-convex optimization: Submodular maximization over continuous domains,” in Artificial Intelligence and Statistics . PMLR, 2017, pp. 111–120. [23] L. Mualem and M. Feldman, “Using partial monotonicity in submodular maximization,” Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems ,vol. 35, pp. 2723–2736, 2022. [24] K. Alex, “Learning multiple layers of features from tiny images,” 

https://www. cs. toronto. edu/kriz/learning-features-2009-TR. pdf , 2009. [25] Y. LeCun and C. Cortes, “MNIST handwritten digit database,” http://yann.lecun.com/exdb/mnist/, 2010. [Online]. Available: http: //yann.lecun.com/exdb/mnist/ [26] H. Xiao, K. Rasul, and R. Vollgraf, “Fashion-mnist: a novel image dataset for benchmarking machine learning algorithms,” 2017. [27] K. K. Thekumparampil, P. Jain, P. Netrapalli, and S. Oh, “Efficient algorithms for smooth minimax optimization,” Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , vol. 32, 2019. [28] Z. Xu, H. Zhang, Y. Xu, and G. Lan, “A unified single-loop alternat-ing gradient projection algorithm for nonconvex–concave and convex– nonconcave minimax problems,” Mathematical Programming , vol. 201, no. 1, pp. 635–706, 2023. [29] T. Lin, C. Jin, and M. Jordan, “On gradient descent ascent for nonconvex-concave minimax problems,” in International Conference on Machine Learning . PMLR, 2020, pp. 6083–6093.