Title: Predictive Fixed-Filter Active Noise Control (PFANC) Using Convolutional Recurrent Neural Networks for Dynamic Noises

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2606.08171v1

Published Time: Tue, 09 Jun 2026 00:50:57 GMT

Number of Pages: 37

Markdown Content:
# Highlights 

Predictive Fixed-Filter Active Noise Control (PFANC) Using Convolutional Recurrent Neural Networks for Dynamic Noises 

Zhengding Luo, Haowen Li, Haozhe Ma, Dongyuan Shi, Wen Zhang, Woon-Seng Gan 

• A Predictive Fixed-filter ANC (PFANC) method with a proactive control paradigm is proposed. 

• A CRNN exploits temporal correlations across multiple noise frames to pre-dict the next-frame control filter. 

• A high-order Markov chain analysis reveals that multi-frame inputs improve control filter prediction. 

• PFANC outperforms GFANC and its variants in controlling dynamic noises and generalizes well across di ff erent acoustic paths. 

> arXiv:2606.08171v1 [eess.AS] 6 Jun 2026

# Predictive Fixed-Filter Active Noise Control (PFANC) Using Convolutional Recurrent Neural Networks for Dynamic Noises 

Zhengding Luo a, Haowen Li a, Haozhe Ma b, Dongyuan Shi c, Wen Zhang c,Woon-Seng Gan a

> aSchool of Electrical and Electronic Engineering, Nanyang Technological University, Singapore
> bSchool of Computing, National University of Singapore, Singapore
> cCenter of Intelligent Acoustics and Immersive Communications, Northwestern Polytechnical University, China

Abstract 

The existing Generative Fixed-Filter Active Noise Control (GFANC) method gen-erates a suitable control filter based on the current noise frame. This reactive de-sign aims to estimate a control filter that is optimal for the present frame rather than the upcoming one. Consequently, it su ff ers from an inherent tracking lag and lacks the predictive capability to handle rapidly varying noises. To address this limitation, we propose the Predictive Fixed-Filter Active Noise Control (PFANC) method with a proactive control paradigm in this paper. In the PFANC method, multiple consecutive noise frames are processed by a Convolutional Recurrent Neural Network (CRNN) to predict the next-frame control filter. By utilizing tem-poral correlations across noise frames to anticipate the control filter in advance, the PFANC method can e ff ectively track dynamic noise changes. Furthermore, the theoretical analysis based on a high-order Markov chain shows that incorporating multiple noise frames enhances the prediction of the control filter. Numerical sim-ulations with linear and logarithmic chirp signals, as well as real-world dynamic noises, validate the e ff ectiveness of the PFANC method and its superiority over GFANC and its variations. The PFANC method also exhibits good transferability across di ff erent acoustic paths. 

Keywords: Active Noise Control (ANC), Predictive ANC, Convolutional Recurrent Neural Network, High-order Markov Chain, Dynamic Noises 

> 1The code will be accessible at https: // github.com /Luo-Zhengding /Predictive-ANC

1. Introduction 

The growing use of industrial equipment such as engines, fans, and compres-sors has intensified acoustic noise problems [1, 2, 3]. Prolonged exposure to ex-cessive noise can cause both physical and psychological harm, including fatigue, loss of concentration, and stress [4, 5, 6]. Traditional passive noise control meth-ods, such as enclosures and barriers, are often bulky, costly, and ine ff ective at low frequencies, where the acoustic wavelength is large relative to the silencer size. Most of the noise encountered in industrial and daily life is dominated by low-frequency components, making Active Noise Control (ANC) particularly suitable [7, 8, 9]. ANC systems employ a secondary source to generate an anti-noise sig-nal with equal amplitude and opposite phase to the primary noise, achieving can-cellation through superposition [10, 11]. This approach is particularly e ff ective for low-frequency attenuation and serves as a powerful complement to traditional passive methods. An ANC system is generally composed of three key components: micro-phones to acquire the primary noise and form reference signals, loudspeakers to produce the antinoise signal, and a Digital Signal Processor (DSP) to implement the control algorithm [12, 13, 14]. Among the various ANC strategies, adaptive ANC algorithms are most widely employed due to their ability to track varia-tions in real-world noise environments. These algorithms, such as the Filtered-x Least Mean Square (FxLMS) and its variants, iteratively update the coe ffi cients of the control filter to minimize the error signal detected by the error microphone [15, 16]. Due to their reliance on the feedback error signal, adaptive algorithms exhibit several limitations. Their convergence is typically slow, making it di ffi cult to track non-stationary or dynamic noise [17, 18, 19]. In addition, improper step-size selection may lead to instability or even divergence during adaptation, which poses challenges for robust deployment in practical ANC applications [20, 21]. To improve response speed and stability, some applications have adopted fixed-filter ANC [22, 23]. In this approach, the control filter is pre-trained o ffl ine and then implemented in the real-time controller. Owing to their simplicity and ro-bustness, fixed-filter ANC methods have been widely deployed in headphones, ducts, windows, and room environments [24, 25, 26]. However, the pre-trained control filter is usually tailored to a specific noise type, resulting in degraded per-formance when the incoming noise di ff ers significantly from the training noise [27, 28, 29, 30]. This limitation motivates the exploration of advanced fixed-filter 2Table 1: Comparison between the proposed PFANC and representative GFANC methods.                     

> Approach Control Paradigm Learning Target Temporal Context Model
> GFANC [34] Reactive Current-frame optimal control filter Single frame CNN GFANC-Bayes [35] Reactive Current-frame optimal control filter Single frame CNN GFANC-Kalman [36] Reactive Current-frame optimal control filter Single frame CNN
> PFANC Proactive Next-frame optimal control filter Multi-frame CRNN

ANC techniques that can handle diverse noise types. Leveraging the strong rep-resentation capability of deep learning, the Selective Fixed-Filter ANC (SFANC) method [31, 32, 33] is proposed to reduce a wide range of noises. The SFANC method utilizes a Convolutional Neural Network (CNN) to select appropriate pre-trained control filters for di ff erent primary noises. However, the limited number of pre-trained control filters restricts its noise reduction perfor-mance, especially when the incoming noise deviates significantly from the filter-training noises. To obtain more appropriate and comprehensive control filters, the Generative Fixed-Filter ANC (GFANC) method [34] was proposed. It generates the control filter through a weighted combination of sub control filters, with the weight vector automatically provided by a CNN conditioned on the input noise. Despite its flexibility, the GFANC method relies only on the current noise frame to generate the control filter. To incorporate additional temporal information, two smoothing-based extensions of GFANC, namely GFANC with CNN-Bayesian Filtering (GFANC-Bayes) and GFANC with CNN-Kalman Filtering (GFANC-Kalman), were proposed [35, 36]. They smooth the newly generated control filter with that of the previous frame, thus exploiting the temporal correlations between adjacent noise frames. The GFANC-Bayes and GFANC-Kalman methods utilize adjacent frame cor-relations to refine the generated control filter; however, like GFANC, they are unable to predict the underlying evolution of the noise, leading to poor tracking of rapidly varying or dynamic noises. Moreover, both the Bayesian and Kalman fil-tering modules require manual parameter tuning, and inappropriate parameter set-tings may degrade the noise control performance of GFANC-Bayes and GFANC-Kalman. In practice, rapidly varying noises exhibit frequency evolution across 3consecutive frames, which provides predictive cues for upcoming noise charac-teristics [37, 38, 39]. This observation highlights the potential of deep neural networks to learn such temporal context [40, 41, 42, 43]. Motivated by this, we propose the Predictive Fixed-Filter Active Noise Control (PFANC) method based on Convolutional Recurrent Neural Network (CRNN) in this paper. In the PFANC method, a CRNN processes multiple consecutive noise frames to predict the next-frame weight vector, which is then used to combine the sub control filters and generate the upcoming control filter. A comparison between PFANC and representative GFANC-based ANC approaches is summarized in Ta-ble 1. The existing GFANC-based methods adopt a reactive control paradigm that estimate a control filter that is optimal for the present frame rather than the up-coming one. Consequently, they su ff ers from an inherent tracking lag and lacks the predictive capability to handle rapidly varying noises. Di ff erently, the PFANC method introduces a proactive framework that exploits multi-frame temporal con-text to predict the next-frame control filter. Specifically, by leveraging multiple historical noise frames together with the current frame, the CRNN can capture a richer temporal context of the noise. Furthermore, the proactive generation of the control filter is particularly beneficial for controlling dynamic noises. In addition, as a fully data-driven approach, the PFANC method avoids the manual parameter tuning required by GFANC-Bayes and GFANC-Kalman. To further justify the proposed design, a theoretical analysis based on a high-order Markov chain is provided, showing that incorporating multiple noise frames im-proves the predictive capability of control-filter generation. Numerical simula-tions using linear and logarithmic chirp signals as well as real-world dynamic noises demonstrate that PFANC consistently outperforms GFANC, GFANC-Bayes, and GFANC-Kalman, while introducing only a slight increase in network param-eters. Moreover, PFANC exhibits good transferability across di ff erent acoustic paths, indicating its suitability for a wide range of practical ANC scenarios. The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. Section 2 introduces the vanilla GFANC method and discusses its limitations. To address these challenges, Section 3 presents the proposed PFANC method. Section 4 provides a theoretical analysis showing why incorporating multiple noise frames improves control filter prediction. Section 5 presents numerical simulations that evaluate the e ff ective-ness of PFANC in handling di ff erent dynamic noises. Finally, Section 6 concludes the paper. 40 0.5 1 1.5 2Frequency (kHz) -30 -25 -20 -15 -10 -5 0    

> Magnitude (dB)
> (a) Pre-trained broadband control filter 00.5 11.5 2Frequency (kHz) -30 -25 -20 -15 -10 -5 0
> (b) M sub control filters

Figure 1: Frequency spectrum of (a) the pre-trained broadband control filter and (b) the M sub control filters. 

2. Preliminaries 

This section first introduces the fundamentals of ANC systems, and then presents the GFANC method [34] along with its limitations. 

2.1. ANC Systems 

A single-channel feedforward ANC system generally consists of a reference microphone, a controller, a secondary source (e.g., loudspeaker), and an error microphone [2]. The reference microphone captures the primary noise as the ref-erence signal x(n). This signal is passed through the control filter to generate the control signal y(n): 

y(n) = wT(n)x(n), (1) where n and T denote the time index and the transpose operation, respectively. The control signal y(n) then drives the secondary source to produce the control sound wave, which passes through the secondary path s(n) to form the anti-noise wave y′(n) as 

y′(n) = y(n) ∗ s(n)

= wT(n)x(n) ∗ s(n), (2) where ∗ denotes linear convolution, and s(n) represents the impulse response of the secondary path. This anti-noise aims to attenuate the disturbance d(n) through acoustic suppression around the error microphone. The resulting residual noise captured by the error microphone, i.e., the error signal e(n), is given by 

e(n) = d(n) − y′(n)

= d(n) − wT(n)x(n) ∗ s(n). (3) 52.2. The GFANC Method 

Traditional adaptive ANC algorithms, such as the FxLMS algorithm and its variants, update the control filter coe ffi cients based on the feedback error signal. In contrast, the GFANC method [34] automatically generates suitable control filters by combining sub control filters, with the combination weights output by a CNN. GFANC does not rely on error-signal-based filter updates during noise control. Hence, it avoids the feedback mechanism and alleviates the risk of divergence. 

2.2.1. Sub Control Filters 

The construction of sub control filters is a crucial step in the GFANC method. First, the target ANC system is used to cancel a broadband noise covering the frequency components of interest. The optimal control filter is referred to as the pre-trained broadband control filter and serves as the sole prior information re-quired by the GFANC method. Following the approach in [35], the pre-trained broadband control filter is decomposed into M sub control filters. The frequency spectrum of the pre-trained broadband control filter and its sub control filters on synthetic acoustic paths are shown in Figure 1. The M sub control filters form the sub control filter matrix C, defined as 

C = [c1, . . . , cm, . . . , cM ]T ∈ RM×L, (4) where cm ∈ R1×L represents the impulse response of the m-th sub control filter of length L. These sub control filters serve as the orthogonal base for generating various control filters. 

2.2.2. Generation of Control Filters 

In the GFANC method, the CNN generates a weight vector for each noise frame. Specifically, the t-th noise frame xt is fed into the CNN, which outputs a weight vector g for combining the sub control filters. This corresponds to a regression task, where the elements of g take values between 0 and 1. The weight vector g is obtained by 

g = CNN (xt; Θ⋆), g = g1, . . . , gm, . . . , gM

 , (5) where gm denotes the weight associated with the m-th sub control filter cm. CNN (·; Θ⋆)represents the trained CNN model with parameters Θ⋆. The weight vector g is then transmitted to the real-time controller, which forms the control filter w by taking the weighted combination of the sub control filters as 

w = gC =

> M

X

> m=1

gmcm ∈ R1×L. (6) 6The generated control filter w with the length of L is subsequently used for sample-by-sample noise cancellation, as described in Section 2.1. 

2.2.3. Limitations of the GFANC Method 

In the GFANC method, the training noise dataset, consisting of N noise in-stances each containing T frames, is denoted as {xit, git}T,Nt=1,i=1, where xit represents the t-th frame of the i-th noise instance. An adaptive labeling mechanism [35] is employed to automatically assign each noise frame xit its optimal weight vector git.The CNN is trained to map the current noise frame xit to its corresponding optimal weight vector git, with the training loss defined as 

LCNN-train = 1

NT 

> N

X

> i=1
> T

X

> t=1

LMSE 

CNN (xit; Θ), git

, (7) where LMSE (·) denotes the Mean Squared Error (MSE) loss function used to quan-tify the di ff erence between the predicted weight vector and the target label. However, this training scheme inherently limits the predictive capability of GFANC. Since the CNN uses only the current noise frame as input and the current-frame optimal weight vector as the learning target, the model learns to estimate the control filter that is optimal for the present frame rather than for the upcom-ing one. This design implicitly assumes that the control filter varies slowly over time, which holds for stationary or slowly varying noises but leads to tracking lag and significant performance degradation for rapidly changing or dynamic noises. Moreover, the GFANC method ignores the temporal correlations across consecu-tive frames, limiting the neural network’s ability to capture the temporal evolution of noise and anticipate its future variations. As extensions of the GFANC method, although the GFANC-Bayes and GFANC-Kalman [35, 36] methods can utilize the correlations of adjacent noise frames, they only smooth the generated filter for the current frame rather than predicting the upcoming control filter. Thus, both GFANC and its extensions are limited by the lack of predictive capability, leading to poor tracking of rapidly varying noises. To address this issue, we propose the PFANC method in which the CRNN model processes both the current and multiple historical noise frames and uses the next-frame optimal weight vector as the learning target. This proactive design enables the PFANC method to capture the temporal dynamics of noise and predict the subsequent control filter. 7Primary path 

> Secondary path

∑ Error signal  

> Disturbance ＋
> —

( ) x n ( ) P z  

> Control filter

W( ) z

> ( ) d n

( ) S z ( ) ¢

y n     

> ( ) e n
> Update
> Processing by
> sampling rate
> Processing by
> frame rate
> Primary noise
> Predicted
> control filter
> Predicted
> weight vector
> F noise frames
> CRNN in Co -processor
> GRU
> Shared
> CNN Module
> Flatten
> FC
> Sigmoid

Figure 2: Schematic of the PFANC method, where the CRNN runs on a co-processor to predict the next-frame weight vector from every F noise frames, while the real-time controller simultaneously performs noise control at the sam-pling rate. 

3. The Proposed PFANC Method 

The schematic of the proposed PFANC method is shown in Figure 2. In this method, the CRNN operates on a co-processor to predict the weight vector for combining sub control filters at the frame rate, while the real-time controller per-forms noise control at the sampling rate in parallel. Unlike the GFANC method, which exploits only the current noise frame to generate a control filter, the PFANC method leverages multiple historical noise frames in addition to the current frame to achieve next-frame control filter prediction. The block diagram of the CRNN is illustrated in Figure 3, which consists of a shared CNN module for frame-wise feature extraction and a Gated Recurrent Unit (GRU) module for temporal de-pendency modeling. The detailed CRNN architecture and training paradigm are described in the following subsection. 

3.1. Convolutional Recurrent Neural Network 

The proposed CRNN architecture illustrated in Figure 3 primarily consists of a CNN module, a GRU module, a flatten layer, a fully connected (FC) layer, and a Sigmoid layer. First, F consecutive noise frames are fed into the shared CNN module for parallel extraction of frame-wise features. Each noise frame 

xt ∈ R(B,1, fs) represents a waveform segment containing fs sampling points, where 8CNN Module             

> GRU
> Predicted
> weight vector
> Parallel Frame -wise Processing
> Shared CNN Module
> Feature Combination
> Flatten
> shared
> shared
> shared
> shared
> 1D Conv Residual block Residual block Max
> pooling
> Max
> pooling Adaptive
> pooling
> Fnoise frames
> Sigmoid
> FC
> tanh
> 1-
> σσ
> +
> Shared GRU Cell

... GRU Cell GRU Cell GRU Cell     

> CNN Module
> CNN Module
> CNN Module
> CNN Module
> Temporal Dependency Modeling
> …

Figure 3: Block diagram of the CRNN model, which learn dynamics from F

consecutive noise frames to predict the next-frame weight vector. It incorporates a shared CNN module for parallel frame-wise feature extraction and a GRU module for temporal dependency modeling. Especially, when 1 ≤ t < F, zero-padding is applied to maintain the input length F.

fs denotes the sampling rate, and B is the batch size during training. By sharing pa-rameters across frames, the CNN module ensures consistent feature extraction and enhances parameter e ffi ciency. The shared CNN module adopts the same architec-ture as in the GFANC method [34] and directly operates on raw one-dimensional (1D) noise waveforms without converting them into spectrogram representations. Specifically, the shared CNN module comprises a 1D convolutional layer, two residual blocks, and pooling layers to perform frame-wise feature extraction and generate compact feature embeddings ut ∈ R(B,128) . Subsequently, the features from F consecutive frames are then combined as R(B,F,128) to serve as the input to the subsequent GRU module. Following the CNN-based feature extraction, a GRU module is employed to model temporal dependencies among the extracted features from F consecutive noise frames. The GRU, a type of Recurrent Neural Network (RNN), utilizes two gating mechanisms, the reset gate and the update gate, to adaptively regulate information flow across time steps [44, 45, 46]. The GRU features a simple ar-chitecture with few parameters, resulting in fast training and low computational cost. Owing to these advantages, the GRU is well suited for temporal modeling 9in the proposed CRNN framework. The GRU module is composed of a series of cascaded GRU cells that share the same parameters across time steps. Each GRU cell receives the input feature at the current frame and the hidden state from the previous frame to update its internal state. The internal operations of the GRU cell in the PFANC method can be formulated as follows: 

• Inputs: The current input noise feature ut and the previous hidden state ht−1

are fed into the GRU cell. 

• Reset Gate: rt = σ(Wrut + Urht−1 + br), (8) where σ(·) denotes the element-wise sigmoid function. The reset gate con-trols how much of the previous hidden state ht−1 should be considered when generating the candidate hidden state ˜ ht.

• Update Gate: zt = σ(Wzut + Uzht−1 + bz), (9) which controls the trade-o ff between retaining the previous hidden state ht−1

and incorporating the newly computed candidate state ˜ ht.

• Candidate Hidden State: 

˜ht = tanh( Whut + Uh(rt ⊙ ht−1) + bh), (10) where ⊙ denotes element-wise multiplication. The reset gate rt modulates the contribution of the previous hidden state before computing the candidate activation. W∗, U∗, b∗ represent the weight matrices and bias vectors of the corresponding gates. 

• Final Hidden State: ht = (1 − zt) ⊙ ht−1 + zt ⊙ ˜ht, (11) which performs a gated interpolation between the previous hidden state ht−1

and the candidate hidden state ˜ ht, e ff ectively balancing memory preserva-tion and update. 

• Output: The updated hidden state ht is propagated to the next time step or to subsequent layers. 10 In summary, the GRU cell performs the following operations sequentially at each time step: 1. Compute the reset and update gates, rt and zt, from ut and ht−1;2. Use rt to regulate the contribution of ht−1 when forming the candidate state ˜ht;3. Combine ˜ ht and ht−1 through the update gate zt;4. Output the updated hidden state ht.The GRU produces a sequence of hidden states H = [ht−F+1, . . . , ht] ∈ R(B,F,128) 

across F time steps, which captures the temporal dependencies among F noise frames. Subsequently, the sequence H aggregates the temporal cues across F

noise frames and is flattened into a feature vector of size ( B, F ×128). This feature vector is then processed by a FC layer followed by a Sigmoid activation to produce the predicted weight vector ˆ gt+1 ∈ R(B,M).

3.2. CRNN Training Strategy 

As discussed in Section 2.2.3, the GFANC method uses the current noise frame as input and trains the CNN with the optimal weight vector of the current frame as the label. Di ff erently, the PFANC method takes multiple historical noise frames together with the current frame as input and uses the next-frame optimal weight vector as a label, enabling the CRNN to learn the temporal dynamics of the noise for filter prediction. The training noise dataset for CRNN is identical to that described in Sec-tion 2.2.3. For each noise instance xi, the sequence from the ( t − F + 1)-th frame to the t-th frame, denoted as [ xit−F+1, . . . , xit], is used as the input to the CRNN, which predicts the weight vector for every F consecutive noise frames. The in-dex t satisfies 1 ≤ t < T . Especially, when 1 ≤ t < F, zero-padding is applied to the preceding frames to maintain the input length F. The corresponding label of [ xit−F+1, . . . , xit] is the optimal weight vector git+1 associated with the next noise frame xit+1.The objective of training is to minimize the discrepancy between the CRNN-predicted and target weight vectors over the entire training dataset. The optimal parameters of the CRNN in the PFANC method, denoted by Θ⋆, are obtained by 11 minimizing the following training loss: 

LCRNN-train = 1

N(T − 1) ·

> N

X 

> i=1
> T−1

X

> t=1

LMSE 

CRNN ([ xit−F+1, . . . , xit]; Θ), git+1

.

(12) Notably, the training loss di ff ers from that used in the GFANC method in Eq. (7). The PFANC method di ff ers from GFANC in that it takes multiple consecutive noise frames [ xit−F+1, . . . , xit] as input instead of a single current frame xit, and uses the next-frame optimal weight vector git+1 as the training label rather than git. This training scheme enables the CRNN to leverage the temporal correlations among consecutive noise frames to predict the upcoming weight vector, thereby enabling a proactive control paradigm in PFANC. 

3.3. Online Noise Control in PFANC 

The online noise control procedure of the PFANC method is summarized in Table 2. After training, the CRNN with its optimal parameters Θ⋆ is used to predict a weight vector from every F noise frames in the PFANC method. The predicted weight vector ˆ gt+1 is obtained as ˆgt+1 = CRNN  [xt−F+1, . . . , xt]; Θ⋆ , (13) which di ff ers from the CNN in GFANC (Eq. 5), where the weight vector is gen-erated solely from the current frame xt. Thus, compared with GFANC, the pro-posed PFANC method leverages temporal dependencies across consecutive noise frames, enabling it to capture cross-frame correlations in the reference signal and anticipate upcoming noise variations. When the newly predicted weight vector ˆ gt+1 di ff ers from the one currently in use g, it is transmitted to the real-time controller to update g. A new control filter 

w is then generated by combining sub control filters using g. The control filter 

w is applied for real-time noise control, which operates at the sampling rate as described in Section 2.1. By adopting a dual-rate architecture, the co-processor and real-time controller operate in parallel, ensuring that the CRNN’s processing latency does not interfere with real-time noise control. This coordinated opera-tion enables delayless noise attenuation, making the PFANC system suitable for practical deployment. 12 Table 2: Pseudo-code of online noise control in the PFANC method. 

Description: The weight vector is predicted by the CRNN in the co-processor based on F noise frames, while real-time noise control is performed at the sampling rate. 

Initialization: F consecutive noise frames are denoted as [ xt−F+1, . . . , xt]. The sub control filter matrix is C = [c1, . . . , cm, . . . , cM ]T.The weight vector is denoted as g = g1, . . . , gm, . . . , gM

.Initialize the weight vector as a zero vector, i.e., g = 0.

CRNN (·; Θ⋆) represents the trained CRNN with parameters Θ⋆.

# Noise control in the real-time controller: for each sample of the reference signal do w = gC = PMm=1 gmcm ▷ Generate the control filter. 

e(n) = d(n) − wT(n)x(n) ∗ s(n) ▷ Real-time noise control. 

end for # Weight vector prediction in the co-processor: for F frames of the reference signal do 

ˆgt+1 = CRNN ([ xt−F+1, . . . , xt]; Θ⋆) ▷ Predict the next-frame weight vector. 

# Update the used weight vector: if g , ˆgt+1 do ▷ If ˆ gt+1 is di ff erent from the currently used weight vector. 

g ← ˆgt+1 ▷ Transmit ˆ gt+1 to the real-time controller to update g.

end for 

4. Theoretical Analysis of Filter Prediction based on Multiple Noise Frames 

This section presents a theoretical analysis of how incorporating multiple noise frames influences the estimation of the control filter. We formulate the ANC pro-cess as a higher-order Hidden Markov Model (HMM) to capture complex tem-poral dependencies. Based on this formulation, we derive information-theoretic lower bounds on the filter estimation error and establish the theoretical justifica-tion for using the CRNN to approximate the optimal estimator. 

4.1. From First-Order HMM to Higher-Order HMM 

In our previous GFANC method [34], we demonstrated that under stationary or slowly varying acoustic environments, the optimal control filter is assumed to evolve slowly in time, i.e., 

wt+1 ≈ wt. (14) 13 xt

xx t −1− +t F 1

w +t 1wt

w −t 1

w − +t F 1

xi

wi

> Hidden state
> Observation

Figure 4: Equivalent high-order Markov chain of ANC progress. This corresponds to a first-order HMM approximation of the filter dynamics. Under this assumption, the control filter depends primarily on the current noise frame, and there exists an approximate deterministic mapping 

wt = φ(xt), (15) where φ(·) denotes the static regression function that predicts the control filter from a single reference frame. To utilize the correlations of adjacent noise frames, the GFANC-Bayes [35] and GFANC-Kalman [36] methods make the first-order dependency explicit by modeling the filter evolution as a linear state-space pro-cess: 

wt = F  φ(xt), wt−1

, (16) where F (·) represents the state-transition function derived from Bayesian or Kalman filtering. These GFANC methods fundamentally rely on the first-order Markov as-sumption and the slow evolution of the optimal control filter, making them more suitable for stationary or slowly varying noises. In practice, ANC systems often exhibit more complex temporal dependen-cies than those implied by a first-order Markov model. The proposed PFANC method relaxes this assumption by allowing wt+1 to depend on multiple preceding states. The filter sequence {wt} ∈ R1×L is treated as the latent state trajectory of an F-order HMM, with {xt} serving as its observations, as illustrated in Figure 4. According to information theory [47], the conditional entropy is monotonically non-increasing with respect to additional conditioning variables. Consequently, in the latent domain: 

H(wt+1 | wt) ≥ H (wt+1 | wt−1: t) ≥ · · · ≥ H (wt+1 | wt−F+1: t). (17) 14 The same monotonicity holds in the observation domain: 

H(wt+1 | xt) ≥ H (wt+1 | xt−1: t) ≥ · · · ≥ H (wt+1 | xt−F+1: t). (18) Here, wt−F+1: t and xt−F+1: t represent the sequences [ wt−F+1, . . . , wt] and [ xt−F+1, . . . , xt], respectively. To make the e ff ect of entropy reduction on estimation error explicit, we con-sider one tap w(k) 

> t+1

of the control filter wt+1. From Eq. (18), 

H(w(k) 

> t+1

| xt) ≥ H (w(k) 

> t+1

| xt−F+1: t). (19) For a scalar variable with conditional variance σ2 

> k

, the Gaussian distribution max-imizes di ff erential entropy [47]. Thus the conditional entropy obeys 

H(w(k) 

> t+1

| xt−F+1: t) ≤ 12 log  2πe σ2

> k

. (20) Rearranging this yields the entropy–variance inequality 

σ2 

> k

= Var w(k) 

> t+1

| xt−F+1: t

 ≥ 12πe exp 2 H(w(k) 

> t+1

| xt−F+1: t). (21) Let w⋆(k) 

> t+1

= E[w(k) 

> t+1

| xt−F+1: t] denote the optimal MSE predictor (i.e., the Mini-mum Mean Square Error (MMSE) estimator). It is a fundamental property of this estimator that the achieved MSE is equal to the conditional variance σ2 

> k

:MSE( w⋆(k) 

> t+1

) = Eh(w(k) 

> t+1

− w⋆(k) 

> t+1

)2i = σ2 

> k

. (22) According to Eq. (21), we therefore obtain the fundamental lower bound MSE( w⋆(k) 

> t+1

) ≥ 12πe exp 2 H(w(k) 

> t+1

| xt−F+1: t). (23) Combining this inequality with the entropy monotonicity in Eq. (19) gives exp 2 H(w(k) 

> t+1

| xt−F+1: t) ≤ exp 2 H(w(k) 

> t+1

| xt). (24) Thus, increasing the number of reference frames F tightens the information-theoretic lower bound on the estimation error of each control filter coe ffi cient, thereby re-ducing (or at least not increasing) the aleatoric uncertainty inherent in the predic-tion task. Since the control filter is composed of L taps, the total MSE satisfies MSE( w⋆

> t+1

) =

> L

X

> k=1

MSE( w⋆(k) 

> t+1

)

≥

> L

X

> k=1

12πe exp 2 H(w(k) 

> t+1

| xt−F+1: t).

(25) 15 Eq. (25) and Eq. (24) therefore indicate that using multiple reference frames yields a tighter (or equal) information-theoretic lower bound on the total MSE, consistent with reduced aleatoric uncertainty. Because the observation window 

xt−F+1: t captures richer temporal correlations induced by the ANC signal propa-gation model, it provides a more informative basis for inferring the control filter trajectory than a single-frame observation. From a statistical standpoint, the re-duced conditional entropy implies that the posterior p(wt+1 | xt−F+1: t) is no more dispersed than in the single-frame case, e ff ectively lowering the intrinsic di ffi culty of the estimation problem. Together with the empirical results in Section 5.3, this theoretical analysis supports the use of PFANC to exploit multi-frame observa-tions for improved control filter prediction. 

4.2. CRNN-Based Approximation of the Optimal Predictor 

The control filter is generated as a weighted combination of M sub control filters. Let C ∈ RM×L denote the sub control filter matrix and gt+1 ∈ R1×M represent the weight vector for the (t +1)-th noise frame. The control filter at time ( t + 1) is computed as 

wt+1 = gt+1C. (26) Under the F-order HMM framework established in the previous subsection, the optimal MSE predictor for the weight vector based on multi-frame observa-tions is 

g⋆ 

> t+1

= E[gt+1 | xt−F+1: t]. (27) This is the predictor that minimizes the MSE. With su ffi cient model capacity and appropriate training, deep neural networks can learn to approximate complex con-ditional expectations [48, 49]. As described in Section 3.2, the CRNN is trained to directly predict the weight vector ˆ gt+1 from multi-frame observations by mini-mizing the MSE between predicted and true weight vectors. Through supervised learning on the training dataset, the trained CRNN can approximate the optimal MSE predictor: ˆgt+1 = CRNN (xt−F+1: t; Θ⋆) ≈ E[gt+1 | xt−F+1: t] = g⋆

> t+1

. (28) Given the deterministic linear mapping wt+1 = gt+1C, the optimal MSE pre-dictor for the control filter is 

w⋆ 

> t+1

= E[wt+1 | xt−F+1: t] = E[gt+1C | xt−F+1: t]. (29) 16 Table 3: Parameter configuration in simulations. 

Definition Parameter 

Frequency range of interest 20–2 , 000 Hz Sampling rate ( fs) 16 KHz Number of frames used to predict weight vector ( F) 5Each frame length 1 second Number of sub control filters ( M) 8Control filter length ( L) 1, 024 Impulse response length of the secondary path 256 Impulse response length of the primary path 512 By the linearity of expectation, 

w⋆ 

> t+1

= E[gt+1C | xt−F+1: t]

= E[gt+1 | xt−F+1: t] C

= g⋆

> t+1

C.

(30) This shows that the optimal predictor of the control filter can be obtained by first computing the optimal predictor of the weight vector, then applying the fixed linear transformation C. Consequently, the CRNN-predicted control filter satisfies ˆwt+1 = ˆgt+1C ≈ g⋆

> t+1

C = w⋆ 

> t+1

= E[wt+1 | xt−F+1: t]. (31) Therefore, by training the CRNN to predict optimal weight vector, we implic-itly approximate the optimal MSE predictor of the control filter. The CRNN o ff ers a principled nonlinear architecture that is capable of approximating the optimal predictor w⋆ 

> t+1

= E[wt+1 | xt−F+1: t] established by the information-theoretic anal-ysis in the previous subsection. By predicting next-frame weight vectors from multi-frame observations through recurrent processing, the PFANC method en-ables proactive control and approaches the reduced information-theoretic MSE lower bounds. 

5. Numerical Simulation 

This section presents simulations conducted to evaluate the e ff ectiveness of the proposed PFANC method. We first describe the training dataset used for CRNN training and examine the model’s performance after training. Subsequently, the noise control capability of the PFANC method is evaluated using linear and log-arithmic chirp signals as well as real-world dynamic noises. Finally, the transfer-ability of PFANC is examined across di ff erent acoustic paths. 17 Figure 5: Training and validation loss evolution during CRNN model training. 

5.1. Parameter Configuration 

The parameter configurations used in the PFANC simulations are summarized in Table 3. The sampling rate is set to 16 kHz, and the control filter length is chosen as 1 , 024 taps. The lengths of the secondary path and primary path are 256 and 512 taps, respectively. Since ANC is particularly e ff ective for low-frequency noises, the target frequency band is defined as 20–2 , 000 Hz to cover most typical low-frequency noises. The number of sub control filters, denoted as M, is set to 8, indicating that the pre-trained 20–2 , 000 Hz broadband control filter is decom-posed into 8 sub control filters. The number of frames used to predict the weight vector ( F) is set to 5. In particular, when 1 ≤ t < 5, zero-padding is applied to the preceding frames to ensure a fixed input of 5 frames. 

5.2. E ff ectiveness of the CRNN 

In this subsection, the dataset used for training the CRNN is first described, and the e ff ectiveness of the trained CRNN is then evaluated on the testing dataset. 

5.2.1. Training dataset 

We used two synthetic noise datasets and one real noise dataset to train and evaluate the CRNN. The two synthetic datasets respectively consist of linear and 18 Table 4: Evaluation results of the CRNN on the test dataset. 

Metric Value 

Network input length 5 seconds MSE loss of weight vector prediction 0.0033 Total trainable parameters 0.31 million Execution time on GPU 0.79 milliseconds Execution time on CPU 7.35 milliseconds logarithmic chirp signals, while the real dataset contains environmental noises. Each synthetic dataset includes 10 ,000 noise instances for training and 1 ,000 in-stances for testing. The synthetic linear and logarithmic chirp signals are gener-ated by continuously sweeping the frequency from a random start frequency to a random end frequency within the 20–2 ,000 Hz range. The real noise dataset is constructed from a subset of the SONYC Urban Sound Tagging Dataset, from which 13 ,000 noise instances are selected for training and 2 ,000 for testing. Each noise instance in all datasets has a duration of 10 seconds, corresponding to 

T = 10 frames per instance. 

5.2.2. Training and testing of the CRNN 

The proposed CRNN was trained using the Adam optimizer with an MSE loss between the predicted and target weight vectors. Figure 5 shows the conver-gence of the training and validation losses, which stabilized after approximately 30 epochs, indicating good generalization and the absence of overfitting. As sum-marized in Table 4, the CRNN contains approximately 0 .31 million trainable pa-rameters, slightly higher than the CNN model used in GFANC (0 .22 million) due to the additional GRU layer for temporal modelling. During testing, the CRNN achieved an MSE loss of 0 .0033 on the test dataset. The model input length was 5 seconds (corresponding to F frames), and its inference time was 0 .79 ms on an NVIDIA H200 Tensor Core GPU and 7 .35 ms on an Intel Xeon Platinum 8558 CPU, demonstrating real-time capability. These results confirm that the CRNN model maintains low computational overhead while e ff ectively capturing tempo-ral dependencies in the primary noise. 

5.3. Noise Control Performance of PFANC 

In this section, the noise control performance of the PFANC method is eval-uated using non-stationary noises, including linear and logarithmic chirp signals as well as real-world dynamic noises. Its performance is further compared with 19 Figure 6: Spectrograms of the error signal obtained (a) without ANC, and with (b) the PFANC method, (c) the GFANC method, (d) the GFANC-Kalman method, and (e) the GFANC-Bayes method, for the 20–1 ,700 Hz linear chirp noise. (f) shows the averaged noise reduction level per second for the four ANC methods. those of the GFANC, GFANC-Bayes, GFANC-Kalman, and FxLMS algorithms. The primary and secondary paths used in this section are synthetic acoustic paths modeled as pure acoustic delays. Next section assesses the transferability of the PFANC method in measured acoustic paths. 20 Figure 7: Spectrograms of the error signal obtained (a) without ANC, and with (b) the PFANC method, (c) the GFANC method, (d) the GFANC-Kalman method, and (e) the GFANC-Bayes method, for the 20–1 ,700 Hz logarithmic chirp noise. (f) shows the averaged noise reduction level per second for the four ANC methods. 

5.3.1. Comparison with GFANC 

Spectrograms of the error signal and the averaged noise reduction level per second obtained by di ff erent ANC methods for the 20–1 , 700 Hz linear chirp noise and the 20–1 , 700 Hz logarithmic chirp noise are illustrated in Figure 6 and Fig-21 Figure 8: Spectral flux of four types of noises: (a) 20–1 ,700 Hz linear chirp noise, (b) 20–1 ,700 Hz logarithmic chirp noise, (c) tra ffi c noise, and (d) trolley noise. ure 7, respectively. Noise reduction level (NR) in dB is defined as NR = 10 log 10 

Pln=1 d2(n)

Pln=1 e2(n) , (32) where l denotes the length of the signal segment. The averaged NR level per second is computed by setting l = 16 ,000 samples, corresponding to one second at a sampling rate of 16 kHz. In Figure 6 and Figure 7, the proposed PFANC method demonstrates clear superiority in controlling both the 20–1 ,700 Hz linear chirp noise and the logarithmic chirp noise. For both signals, the PFANC method eff ectively suppresses the full frequency band after the first second. The lack of noise reduction during the first second is expected, as the CRNN requires multiple preceding noise frames to predict the upcoming-frame weight vector; thus, there is no previous frame before the first second. In contrast, the GFANC method exhibits limited capability in tracking the fre-quency evolution of chirp signals, particularly for the logarithmic chirp noise. Its 22 NR level remains consistently lower than that of the PFANC method. The perfor-mance gap becomes especially pronounced during the 7 − 10 second interval of the logarithmic chirp noise, where the instantaneous frequency rises rapidly. The rapid variation renders the GFANC method, which depends only on the current noise frame and lacks predictive capability, unable to track the accelerated spec-tral changes, resulting in poor noise attenuation. The performance comparisons between PFANC and GFANC validate the e ff ectiveness of incorporating multi-ple historical frames and control filter prediction for attenuating rapidly varying noises. Furthermore, the real-world noises (tra ffi c and trolley) exhibit milder non-stationarity than the dynamic chirp signals, as indicated by their lower spectral-flux values in Figure 8. Spectral flux [50] quantifies the frame-to-frame variation of the short-time spectrum and thereby characterizes the temporal dynamics of a signal’s spectral content, where higher values correspond to more pronounced non-stationarity. As shown in Figure 9 and Figure 10, the reduced spectral-flux levels of the tra ffi c and trolley noises are accompanied by a smaller performance di ff erence between PFANC and GFANC compared with the chirp cases. Even un-der such conditions, PFANC consistently achieves higher NR levels, typically by approximately 3 to 4 dB over several seconds, demonstrating its good capability to track moderate temporal variations in real noises. 

5.3.2. Comparison with GFANC-Bayes and GFANC-Kalman 

As introduced in Section 4.1, the GFANC-Bayes and GFANC-Kalman meth-ods [35, 36] extend GFANC by filtering the newly generated control filter with the filter used in the previous frame, thereby exploiting temporal correlations between adjacent noise frames. However, similar to GFANC, these approaches lack predic-tive capability. When the previously applied control filter becomes mismatched to a rapidly changing noise environment, the recursive filtering operation prop-agates and even amplifies the mismatch instead of correcting it. Consequently, estimation errors accumulate over time, leading to degraded performance under highly non-stationary conditions. This behavior is clearly observed in the linear and logarithmic chirp noises shown in Figure 6 and Figure 7, where both GFANC-Bayes and GFANC-Kalman exhibit limited e ff ectiveness, particularly in the later stages of the chirp signals, providing only approximately 5 to 7 dB of noise re-duction. In contrast, the PFANC method continues to attenuate the chirp signals throughout the sequence, with most seconds achieving more than 20 dB of re-duction. These results suggest that smoothing-based GFANC approaches struggle with rapidly varying noises because they lack predictive capability, whereas the 23 Figure 9: Error signals (a)–(c) and the averaged noise reduction level per second (d) obtained with the PFANC method, the GFANC method, and the FxLMS algo-rithm for the tra ffi c noise. proposed PFANC method can e ff ectively track dynamic spectral changes. 

5.3.3. Comparison with The FxLMS Algorithm 

In this subsection, the proposed PFANC method is compared with the tra-ditional adaptive algorithm, the FxLMS algorithm, in attenuating the real noises (tra ffi c and trolley). The performance comparisons of the proposed PFANC method and the FxLMS algorithm on the tra ffi c and trolley noises are illustrated in Fig-ure 9 and Figure 10, respectively. The step size of the FxLMS algorithm is set to 0.0001. As shown in Figure 9 and Figure 10, the PFANC method provides a quick response to the real noises, whereas the FxLMS algorithm still requires some time to converge. Specifically, for the tra ffi c noise, the PFANC method achieves an NR value of more than 15 dB after the first second, while the FxLMS algorithm re-quires more than 6 seconds to converge and reach a similar NR value. For the trolley noise, the FxLMS algorithm does not reach the steady state throughout the entire noise length due to its slow convergence speed. Thus, the PFANC method 24 Figure 10: Error signals (a)–(c) and the averaged noise reduction level per second (d) obtained with the PFANC method, the GFANC method, and the FxLMS algo-rithm for the trolley noise. significantly outperforms the FxLMS algorithm in terms of response speed when dealing with real dynamic noises. 

5.4. Transferability of PFANC 

The previous section has evaluated the e ffi ciency of the proposed PFANC method on synthetic acoustic paths. This section assesses the transferability of the proposed PFANC method across di ff erent measured acoustic paths. We define two new ANC systems, System-A and System-B, using acoustic paths measured from the vent of a noise chamber and from an ANC window, respectively. The magnitude and phase responses of the measured acoustic paths in ANC System-A and System-B are presented in Appendix A, and they di ff er considerably from the synthetic ones, which are modelled as pure acoustic delays. When transferring the PFANC method from synthetic to real acoustic paths, the CRNN model trained on synthetic acoustic paths is applied directly without retraining. Meanwhile, the pre-trained broadband control filter is updated based 25 Table 5: Overall NR values (in dB) of the PFANC and GFANC methods in di ff er-ent ANC systems Algorithm Linear chirp signal Logarithmic chirp signal System-A System-B System-A System-B PFANC 20.73 11.46 18.50 16.44 GFANC 14.62 10.49 7.09 15.74  

> *20–1 ,700 Hz linear and logarithmic chirp noise.

Figure 11: Spectrograms of the error signal for the 20–1 ,700 Hz linear chirp noise: (a)–(c) results from ANC System-A and (d)–(f) results from ANC System-B. on the real acoustic paths and then decomposed into sub control filters as described in Section 2.2.1. The sub control filters are system-specific and depend on the acoustic paths; however, the outputs of the CRNN rely only on the input noises. This setup allows the PFANC method to be easily transferred across di ff erent application scenarios. The overall NR values over the entire noise length for the PFANC and GFANC methods in di ff erent ANC systems are summarised in Table 5. This measure is di ff erent from the averaged NR value calculated in each second. As shown in Ta-ble 5, in ANC System-A, the PFANC method achieves a more than 6 dB higher NR value than the GFANC method, whereas the improvement in ANC System-B is very small. This discrepancy primarily reflects the di ff erences in the acous-tic paths of the two systems. The detailed noise reduction performances over 26 Figure 12: Spectrograms of the error signal for the 20–1 ,700 Hz logarithmic chirp noise: (a)–(c) results from ANC System-A and (d)–(f) results from ANC System-B. the entire noises are illustrated in Figure 11 and Figure 12. For the linear chirp noise (Figure 11), the main noise frequency components di ff er between System-A and System-B due to their distinct acoustic path characteristics, yet the PFANC method e ff ectively suppresses the dominant components in both cases. In contrast, the GFANC method exhibits weaker tracking ability, as evidenced by intermittent attenuation. For the logarithmic chirp noise (Figure 12), the PFANC method con-sistently outperforms the GFANC method in both systems, particularly in the late portion of the noise, which aligns with the results on synthetic acoustic paths in Figure 7. Furthermore, the overall NR values in System-B are lower than those in System-A because the noise energy in the first second is much higher in System-B, and neither the PFANC nor the GFANC method provides attenuation during this initial period. As discussed above, the results from System-A and System-B indicate the good transferability of the PFANC method, enabling its deployment across diverse acoustic environments. 

6. Conclusion 

Di ff erent from the existing GFANC method and its variations, this paper pro-poses the PFANC approach that enables a proactive control paradigm. In the 27 PFANC method, a CRNN exploits temporal correlations across multiple noise frames to predict the optimal control filter for the next frame. From an information-theoretic perspective, we show that multi-frame inputs provide a more informa-tive representation for control-filter estimation. Simulation results demonstrate that GFANC and its variants, including GFANC-Bayes and GFANC-Kalman, ex-hibit limited tracking capability for rapidly varying noises due to their lack of predictive modeling, particularly in the later portion of logarithmic chirp noise. In contrast, the proposed PFANC method achieves superior noise reduction for both chirp signals and real-world dynamic noises and responds faster than the FxLMS algorithm. Moreover, the PFANC method exhibits good transferability across dif-ferent acoustic paths. These results highlight the e ff ectiveness of predictive ANC in tracking rapidly varying noises. 

Appendix A. Measured Acoustic Paths 

The appendix provides the magnitude and phase responses of the acoustic paths measured in the vent of a noise chamber (ANC System-A) and an ANC window (ANC System-B), as illustrated in Figure A.13 and Figure A.14. 28 Figure A.13: The impulse responses, magnitude responses, and phase responses of the primary and secondary paths measured from the vent of a noise chamber (ANC System-A). 29 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7Frequency (kHz) -30 -20 -10 010 20 30 Magnitude (dB) 

Magnitude response of the primary path 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7Frequency (kHz) 15 20 25 30 35 Magnitude (dB) 

Magnitude response of the secondary path 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7Frequency (kHz) -3.5 -3 -2.5 -2 -1.5 -1 -0.5 0Phase (degrees) 10 4 Phase response of the primary path 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7Frequency (kHz) -300 -200 -100 0100 200 Phase (degrees) 

Phase response of the secondary path Figure A.14: The impulse responses, magnitude responses, and phase responses of the primary and secondary paths measured from an ANC window (ANC System-B). 30 References 

[1] S. M. Kuo, D. R. Morgan, Active noise control: a tutorial review, Proceed-ings of the IEEE 87 (6) (1999) 943–973. [2] C. N. Hansen, Understanding active noise cancellation, CRC Press, 2002. [3] Y. Kajikawa, W.-S. Gan, S. M. Kuo, Recent advances on active noise control: open issues and innovative applications, APSIPA Transactions on Signal and Information Processing 1 (2012) e3. [4] F. Yang, J. Guo, J. Yang, Stochastic analysis of the filtered-x lms algorithm for active noise control, IEEE /ACM Transactions on Audio, Speech, and Language Processing 28 (2020) 2252–2266. [5] G. Huang, J. R. Jensen, J. Chen, J. Benesty, M. G. Christensen, A. Sugiyama, G. Elko, T. Gaensler, Advances in microphone array processing and multi-channel speech enhancement, in: ICASSP 2025-2025 IEEE International Conference on Acoustics, Speech and Signal Processing (ICASSP), IEEE, 2025, pp. 1–5. [6] N. Zheng, X.-L. Zhang, Phase-aware speech enhancement based on deep neural networks, IEEE /ACM Transactions on Audio, Speech, and Language Processing 27 (1) (2018) 63–76. [7] J. Cheer, S. J. Elliott, Multichannel control systems for the attenuation of interior road noise in vehicles, Mechanical Systems and Signal Processing 60 (2015) 753–769. [8] S. J. Elliott, P. A. Nelson, Active noise control, IEEE signal processing mag-azine 10 (4) (1993) 12–35. [9] Y. Zhou, H. Zhao, D. Liu, H. Zhang, Adaptive narrowband active noise con-trol trained by genetic algorithm, IEEE Transactions on Instrumentation and Measurement (2024). [10] A. Aboutiman, K. S. A. Maamoun, H. R. Karimi, F. Ripamonti, Hybrid deep learning–based active noise control for encapsulated structures with open-ings, Expert Systems with Applications (2026) 131247. 31 [11] J. Zhang, T. D. Abhayapala, W. Zhang, P. N. Samarasinghe, S. Jiang, Active noise control over space: A wave domain approach, IEEE /ACM Transac-tions on audio, speech, and language processing 26 (4) (2018) 774–786. [12] L. Bai, S. Lian, M. Li, Y. He, L. Rao, X. Zeng, R. Sun, K. Chen, J. Lu, Wavenet-volterra neural network for active noise control: A fully causal ap-proach, Mechanical Systems and Signal Processing 241 (2025) 113486. [13] C. Liang, F. Ripamonti, H. R. Karimi, S. Wrona, M. Pawełczyk, A stepwise simultaneous perturbation stochastic approximation algorithm for stability improvement of active noise control systems, Mechanical Systems and Sig-nal Processing 237 (2025) 112915. [14] Y. Iotov, S. M. Nørholm, V. Belyi, M. Dyrholm, M. G. Christensen, Compu-tationally e ffi cient fixed-filter anc for speech based on long-term prediction for headphone applications, in: ICASSP 2022-2022 IEEE International Con-ference on Acoustics, Speech and Signal Processing (ICASSP), IEEE, 2022, pp. 761–765. [15] Q. Xu, S. Wang, J. Tao, H. Zou, X. Qiu, Creating personal sound zones in car cabins with active noise control, Applied Acoustics 235 (2025) 110670. [16] C.-Y. Chang, C.-T. Chuang, S. M. Kuo, C.-H. Lin, Multi-functional active noise control system on headrest of airplane seat, Mechanical Systems and Signal Processing 167 (2022) 108552. [17] C. R. Fuller, A. H. von Flotow, Active control of sound and vibration, IEEE Control Systems Magazine 15 (6) (1995) 9–19. [18] T. Schumacher, H. Kr¨ uger, M. Jeub, P. Vary, C. Beaugeant, Active noise control in headsets: A new approach for broadband feedback anc, in: 2011 IEEE International conference on acoustics, speech and signal processing (ICASSP), IEEE, 2011, pp. 417–420. [19] Z. Luo, D. Shi, W.-S. Gan, A hybrid sfanc-fxnlms algorithm for active noise control based on deep learning, IEEE Signal Processing Letters 29 (2022) 1102–1106. [20] J. Luo, K. Chen, L. Yang, J. Zhang, F. Tian, L. Wang, J. Qiao, A multi-strategy enhanced algorithm for active impulsive noise control, Mechanical Systems and Signal Processing 247 (2026) 113946. 32 [21] L. Lu, K.-L. Yin, R. C. de Lamare, Z. Zheng, Y. Yu, X. Yang, B. Chen, A survey on active noise control in the past decade–part ii: Nonlinear systems, Signal Processing 181 (2021) 107929. [22] D. Gao, H. Yao, X. Peng, S. Liang, J. Yang, J. Li, Active and passive noise control based on helmholtz resonator acoustic metamaterials and edgf-hafxlms algorithm, Mechanical Systems and Signal Processing 244 (2026) 113798. [23] B. Wang, D. Shi, Z. Luo, X. Shen, J. Ji, W.-S. Gan, Transferable selective virtual sensing active noise control technique based on metric learning, in: ICASSP 2025 - 2025 IEEE International Conference on Acoustics, Speech and Signal Processing (ICASSP), 2025, pp. 1–5. [24] L. Bhan, T. Murao, C. Shi, W.-S. Gan, S. Elliott, Feasibility of the full-rank fixed-filter approach in the active control of noise through open windows, in: INTER-NOISE and NOISE-CON Congress and Conference Proceedings, Vol. 253, Institute of Noise Control Engineering, 2016, pp. 3548–3555. [25] Y. Iotov, S. M. Nørholm, V. Belyi, M. G. Christensen, Adaptive sparse lin-ear prediction in fixed-filter anc headphone applications for multi-speaker speech reduction, in: 2023 IEEE Workshop on Applications of Signal Pro-cessing to Audio and Acoustics (WASPAA), IEEE, 2023, pp. 1–5. [26] M. Miyoshi, Y. Kaneda, Inverse filtering of room acoustics, IEEE Transac-tions on acoustics, speech, and signal processing 36 (2) (1988) 145–152. [27] K. Doi, Y. Kajikawa, Sfanc with compensation filter based on mefxdctlms algorithm, in: 2023 Asia Pacific Signal and Information Processing Asso-ciation Annual Summit and Conference (APSIPA ASC), IEEE, 2023, pp. 1240–1244. [28] X. Su, D. Shi, Z. Zhu, W.-S. Gan, L. Ye, Spatial-frequency-based selec-tive fixed-filter algorithm for multichannel active noise control, IEEE Signal Processing Letters 31 (2024) 2635–2639. [29] S. Park, D. Park, Low-power fpga realization of lightweight active noise cancellation with cnn noise classification, Electronics 12 (11) (2023) 2511. 33 [30] L. Yin, Z. Zhang, M. Wu, S. Zhou, J. Guo, J. Yang, J. Zhang, Selective fixed-filter active noise control based on frequency response matching in headphones, Applied Acoustics 211 (2023) 109505. [31] D. Shi, B. Lam, K. Ooi, X. Shen, W.-S. Gan, Selective fixed-filter active noise control based on convolutional neural network, Signal Processing 190 (2022) 108317. [32] Z. Luo, H. Ma, B. Wang, D. Shi, W.-S. Gan, Reinforcement learning-based selective fixed-filter active noise control (rl-sfanc): From theory to real-time headphone implementation, Signal Processing (2026) 110695. [33] A. Aboutiman, Z. Rachman, T. Oberman, F. Alletta, J. Kang, H. R. Karimi, F. Ripamonti, Subjective perception analysis of active noise control algo-rithms in an encapsulated structure: An experimental study, Applied Acous-tics 239 (2025) 110823. [34] Z. Luo, J. Ji, B. Wang, D. Shi, H. Ma, W.-S. Gan, Deep learning-based gen-erative fixed-filter active noise control: Transferability and implementation, Mechanical Systems and Signal Processing 238 (2025) 113207. [35] Z. Luo, D. Shi, W.-S. Gan, Q. Huang, Delayless generative fixed-filter active noise control based on deep learning and bayesian filter, IEEE /ACM Trans-actions on Audio, Speech, and Language Processing 32 (2024) 1048–1060. [36] Z. Luo, D. Shi, X. Shen, J. Ji, W.-S. Gan, Gfanc-kalman: Generative fixed-filter active noise control with cnn-kalman filtering, IEEE Signal Processing Letters 31 (2024) 276–280. [37] H. Zhang, A. Pandey, et al., Low-latency active noise control using attentive recurrent network, IEEE /ACM Transactions on Audio, Speech, and Lan-guage Processing 31 (2023) 1114–1123. [38] A. Mostafavi, Y.-J. Cha, Deep learning-based active noise control on con-struction sites, Automation in Construction 151 (2023) 104885. [39] Y.-J. Cha, A. Mostafavi, S. S. Benipal, Dnoisenet: Deep learning-based feed-back active noise control in various noisy environments, Engineering Appli-cations of Artificial Intelligence 121 (2023) 105971. 34 [40] H. Zhang, D. Wang, Deep anc: A deep learning approach to active noise control, Neural Networks 141 (2021) 1–10. [41] D. Singh, R. Gupta, A. Kumar, R. Bahl, Enhancing active noise control through stacked autoencoders: Training strategies, comparative analysis, and evaluation with practical setup, Engineering Applications of Artificial Intel-ligence 135 (2024) 108811. [42] J. Y. Oh, H. W. Jung, M. H. Lee, K. H. Lee, Y. J. Kang, Enhancing active noise control of road noise using deep neural network to update secondary path estimate in real time, Mechanical Systems and Signal Processing 206 (2024) 110940. [43] Q. Xiang, Y. Chu, M. Wu, G. Yu, A combined method for multi-channel active noise control based on online adaptive estimation and o ffl ine convo-lutional neural network, The Journal of the Acoustical Society of America 154 (4 supplement) (2023) A79–A79. [44] R. Jozefowicz, W. Zaremba, I. Sutskever, An empirical exploration of recur-rent network architectures, in: International conference on machine learning, PMLR, 2015, pp. 2342–2350. [45] Y. Yu, X. Si, C. Hu, J. Zhang, A review of recurrent neural networks: Lstm cells and network architectures, Neural computation 31 (7) (2019) 1235– 1270. [46] H. Li, W. Zhang, L. Zhang, Doa estimation of room reflections using nn-based music algorithm, in: 2023 Asia Pacific Signal and Information Pro-cessing Association Annual Summit and Conference (APSIPA ASC), IEEE, 2023, pp. 1960–1965. [47] T. M. Cover, Elements of information theory, John Wiley & Sons, 1999. [48] Y. A. Zhang, F. Ma, T. D. Abhayapala, P. N. Samarasinghe, A. Bastine, An active noise control system based on soundfield interpolation using a physics-informed neural network, in: ICASSP 2024-2024 IEEE Interna-tional Conference on Acoustics, Speech and Signal Processing (ICASSP), IEEE, 2024, pp. 506–510. 35 [49] D. Chen, L. Cheng, D. Yao, J. Li, Y. Yan, A secondary path-decoupled ac-tive noise control algorithm based on deep learning, IEEE Signal Processing Letters 29 (2021) 234–238. [50] S. O. Sadjadi, J. H. Hansen, Unsupervised speech activity detection using voicing measures and perceptual spectral flux, IEEE signal processing letters 20 (3) (2013) 197–200. 36