Title: A 65 nm Multi-Modal Bayesian Inference Engine with 16.3 fJ/Sample Calibration-Free GRNG for Risk-Aware At-Home Skin Lesion Screening

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2606.07439v1

Published Time: Mon, 08 Jun 2026 01:15:39 GMT

Number of Pages: 11

Markdown Content:
> IEEE TCAS-I, VOL. X, NO. Y, MONTH YYYY 1

# A 65 nm Multi-Modal Bayesian Inference Engine with 16.3 fJ/Sample Calibration-Free GRNG for Risk-Aware At-Home Skin Lesion Screening 

Steven Davis, Graduate Student Member, IEEE , Likai Pei, Graduate Student Member, IEEE , Jianbo Liu, Graduate Student Member, IEEE , Zephan M. Enciso, Graduate Student Member, IEEE , Boyang Cheng, Graduate Student Member, IEEE , Xueji Zhao, Graduate Student Member, IEEE , Danny Z. Chen, Fellow, IEEE , Ningyuan Cao, Member, IEEE 

Abstract —We present a 65 nm , risk-aware multi-modal Bayesian inference engine that enables privacy-preserving, fully on-device analysis for safe at-home skin lesion screening under uncontrolled user conditions. The compute-in-memory architec-ture performs in-word Mixture-of-Gaussian sampling, improving uncertainty fidelity beyond uni-modal Bayesian neural networks (BNNs). This added expressiveness increases equal-risk operating coverage by 1.4×, improves robustness to user-data perturba-tions by > 1.5×, enhances process variation resilience by 5.5×,and improves balanced accuracy by 1.8% over state-of-the-art uni-modal BNNs. Hardware robustness is further strengthened by calibration-free Gaussian random number generation using complementary process variation, achieving 16 .3 fJ /sample and 

168 .6 GSa/s/ mm 2 efficiency. These results demonstrate a practi-cal, energy-efficient, and risk-aware edge AI solution for privacy-conscious medical screening. 

Index Terms —Mixture-of-Gaussian; Bayesian Neural Net-work; Skin Lesion Screening; Imbalanced Dataset; At-Home Screening; Calibration-free; Gaussian Random Number 

I. I NTRODUCTION 

# SKIN cancer is among the most common yet most fre-quently under-detected malignancies, with patient out-comes strongly dependent on early identification [1], [2]. Early-stage lesions often exhibit subtle visual features or may evolve slowly, leading to delayed clinical evaluation and more costly medical procedures [3], [4]. Skin cancer represents approximately one-third of all cancer diagnoses worldwide, with an estimated one in five Americans expected to be diag-nosed during their lifetime [5]. Although highly treatable when detected early, recent U.S. estimates report over 100,000 new melanoma cases and more than 10,000 deaths annually [6]. Moreover, patients with a history of malignant lesions, as well as individuals with pre-cancerous abnormalities, remain susceptible to recurrence or the emergence of new high-risk lesions, necessitating continual surveillance even after initial treatment or diagnosis [7], [8]. These trends highlight 

Manuscript received DD Month, YYYY; revised DD Month YYYY; accepted DD Month YYYY. Date of publication DD Month YYYY; date of current version 28 March 2024. This work was in part supported by the National Science Foundation (NSF Grant 2426639).This article was recommended by Title First Last. (Corresponding author: Steven Davis.) 

The authors are with the College of Engineering at the University of Notre Dame, Notre Dame, IN, USA. Digital Object Identifier 00.0000/TCS1.0000.0000000 

Fig. 1. At-home medical screening offers rapid assessment and privacy, but suffers from user-error and unreliable environments. MoG BNNs reduce the risk associated with misclassifications. 

a persistent gap between clinical detectability and real-world screening, motivating the need for frequent, accessible, and reliable monitoring beyond traditional in-clinic workflows. Protecting patient privacy and sensitive medical data is essential for enabling frequent, user-driven screening. Medical monitoring technologies now support rapid, at-home disease assessment without requiring clinical visits, allowing earlier intervention and longitudinal observation [9], [10]. However, many existing solutions remain dependent on healthcare-provider mediation or cloud-based analytics, limiting au-tonomous operation. Reliance on centralized computing also introduces additional risks, including exposure of medical records [11], [12] and susceptibility to adversarial or data-poisoning attacks on shared datasets and models [13], [14]. By contrast, fully on-device screening performs inference locally, reducing communication latency and data expo-sure—properties particularly important for recurring tasks such as skin lesion monitoring [15]. Accordingly, this work defines privacy as executing screening and inference entirely on-device, without transmitting sensitive medical data to ex-ternal servers or shared computational infrastructure. 

0000–0000/00$00.00 © 2026 IEEE  

> arXiv:2606.07439v1 [cs.AR] 5 Jun 2026 2IEEE TCAS-I, VOL. X, NO. Y, MONTH YYYY

However, at-home screening operates under uncontrolled acquisition conditions, including user handling variability, lighting changes, motion blur, and focus misalignment [16], [17] (Fig. 1). Medical datasets are also inherently imbalanced, with rare but high risk cases underrepresented, and deployment conditions often differ from training due to evolving users and environments [18], [19]. Together, these factors increase the risk of overconfident false-negative (missed cancerous) predic-tions, which are unacceptable in life-threatening settings. Deterministic neural networks are not explicitly designed to quantify predictive uncertainty and commonly rely on softmax scores, which provide relative class confidence rather than uncertainty about the model’s predictions and can be sensitive to noise [20]. Bayesian neural networks (BNNs) address this limitation by modeling weights probabilistically, enabling cal-ibrated uncertainty estimation and risk-aware inference [21], [22]. However, most BNN implementations assume uni-modal Gaussian weight distributions, which limits expressiveness and degrades uncertainty fidelity [23], [24]. Mixture-of-Gaussian (MoG) BNNs provide a natural exten-sion by representing each weight as a mixture of K Gaussian components, enabling approximation of complex distribution posteriors and improved uncertainty fidelity [24], [25]. Thus, this expressiveness enhances the risk–model coverage trade-offs, especially under the variability of user inputs (Fig. 1). Despite these advantages, MoG BNNs are impractical on existing edge hardware due to increased storage, sampling complexity, and poor scaling with K.Recent BNN accelerators [26]–[30] integrate Gaussian ran-dom number generators (GRNGs) with compute-in-memory (CIM) architectures to reduce sampling overhead. Neverthe-less, state-of-the-art (SOTA) CIM-based designs remain re-stricted to uni-modal distributions and face two key limita-tions: (1) near-CIM GRNGs incur data movement overhead that undermines in-memory efficiency [27], [28], and (2) in-word analog GRNGs suffer from device-to-device (D2D) variation, requiring costly and fragile calibration—particularly under near- and sub-threshold operation [26], [30]. These con-straints prevent scalable support for expressive probabilistic models. This work, to the best of our knowledge, presents the first CIM Bayesian inference engine that supports scalable, calibration-free MoG sampling. This work makes the follow-ing key contributions:  

> •

First In-Memory MoG BNN Hardware : We realize a CIM system that performs MoG weight sampling with a programmable mixture order ( K = 1 –16 ), enabling post-fabrication tuning of model expressiveness versus throughput, and demonstrating up to 337.3 GOp/s/ mm 2. 

> •

Calibration-Free In-Word GRNG : A novel GRNG exploits complementary process variation for ultra-low-energy (16.3 fJ /sample) operation, while eliminating D2D offset calibration, achieving 168.6 GSa/s/ mm 2 sampling.  

> •

Robust At-Home Skin Lesion Screening : MoG BNN models demonstrate improved class-balanced accuracy (1.8%), expanded model coverage at equal-risk (1.4 ×), and enhanced resilience to at-home screening-induced user error ( >1.5 ×) compared to SOTA uni-modal BNNs. II. B ACKGROUND 

A. Deep Learning for Skin Lesion Classification 

Deep learning, particularly convolutional neural networks (CNNs), has become the dominant approach for automated skin lesion classification, with diagnostic performance strongly influenced by network architecture, feature extractor choice, and training protocol. Comparative studies of modern back-bones—including VGG, Inception, DenseNet, and ResNet variants—report substantial variability in balanced accuracy and per-class recall on benchmarks from challenges hosted by the International Skin Imaging Collaboration (ISIC) [31], even when models are trained on identical datasets [18], [19]. These results highlight the sensitivity of skin lesion classification performance to architectural design choices rather than the existence of a single universally optimal model [31], [32]. Despite this variability, CNN-based systems have consistently achieved performance comparable to or exceeding that of dermatologists for melanoma detection and benign–malignant discrimination [33], [34]. As a result, most contemporary skin lesion classification architectures have emphasized robustness through architecture selection, transfer or ensemble learning, and imbalance-aware training strategies; however, they remain primarily optimized for predictive performance under balanced evaluation metrics and controlled evaluation settings, with comparatively less emphasis on expressive weight representation for minority class modes or uncertainty quantification with risk-aware decision-making. This gap becomes particularly important for at-home skin lesion screening scenarios, where image quality, user variability, and ambiguous cases are unavoidable and where actionable risk awareness is essential. Consequently, the integration of calibrated uncertainty estimation and risk-sensitive inference into real-time deployment remains an open challenge, motivating alternative probabilistic modeling ap-proaches and hardware-efficient implementations. 

B. Bayesian Neural Networks 1) BNN Overview: BNNs are distinguished by their ability to provide probabilistic estimates of uncertainty with their pre-dictions [21], [22]. This capability is essential for deployments that require decision robustness, especially when inference data diverges significantly from training data. The core mathematical principle of BNNs is encapsulated in the posterior distribution of the weights, formalized as: 

P (W|X, Y) = P (Y|W, X) P (W)

P (X) , (1) where P (W|X, Y) denotes the posterior probability of the weights W given the input X and output Y, P (Y|W, X)

represents the likelihood of observing the given outputs for a set of weights and inputs, P (W) is the prior distribution of the weights, and P (X) is the evidence or the probability of observing the input data. The computational complexity of directly calculating the posterior distribution in BNNs for each weight often re-quires variational inference methods. These methods in BNNs approximate the posterior of the weights using a Gaussian DAVIS, PEI, et al. : 65 NM MULTI-MODAL BAYESIAN INFERENCE ENGINE WITH 16.3 FJ/SAMPLE CALIBRATION-FREE GRNG 3  

> Fig. 2. MoG Sampling requires two steps: (1) Categorically selecting one of
> Kdistribution to sample from based on the mixing ratios and (2) scaling a standard normal distribution ( ϵ) to the selected parameters.

distribution w ∼ N (μ, σ ), where μ and σ represent the mean and standard deviation variational parameters [23], [24], which are trained for each weight by employing Bayes by Backprop [35]. 

2) BNN Hardware: BNN inference requires multiple sam-ples per input to estimate the mean and variance of the classi-fication score, which are essential for quantifying uncertainty. In resource-constrained environments, such as IoT and edge computing, energy-efficient custom processors or CIM units are critical to optimize inference. Recent BNN accelerators [26]–[30] enhance hardware effi-ciency through optimized GRNG techniques and leverage CIM architectures to reduce memory bottlenecks. However, these solutions focus on efficient GRNG integration, neglecting the complexities of sampling calibration and managing multi-distribution storage and generation. SOTA accelerators also suggest further simplification of weight generation through dynamic weight decomposition, in which weights are alternatively expressed as w = μ + ϵ · σ,where ϵ is drawn from a standard normal distribution ϵ ∼N (0 , 1) , which presents insights for the storage of decom-posed distributions within a CIM hardware architecture [26], [29], [30]. 

C. Mixture-of-Gaussian (MoG) BNN 

MoG weight representations provide an expressive Bayesian parameterization in which each weight is modeled as a multi-modal variable rather than a single uni-modal distribution. By expressing each parameter as a finite mixture of Gaussian components, these formulations can approximate arbitrarily complex weight distributions, with larger values of K enabling increasingly rich representations [24], [36]. This multi-modal structure preserves multiple plausible hypotheses within the weight space, allowing MoG-based BNNs to more faithfully capture epistemic uncertainty arising from ambiguous inputs, class imbalance, or limited training data. In contrast to Gaus-sian addition or ensemble-based approaches, which aggre-gate uncertainty through linear superposition or prediction averaging, MoG weights represent uncertainty as an explicit categorical mixture over distinct parameter modes, introducing a higher-order stochastic structure that cannot be captured by single-Gaussian or averaged representations [24], [25]. Statistically, each MoG weight is encoded as a mixture of 

K uni-modal Gaussian components whose contributions are governed by mixing ratios ( π) forming a categorical distribu-tion. The k-th component is parameterized by its mean and variance, while its associated coefficient πk, k = 1 , 2, . . . , K , 

> Fig. 3. The system level overview of on-device skin-lesion feature extraction and MoG Bayesian inference.

defines the probability of selecting that component during inference under the constraint PKk=1 πk = 1. This repre-sentation leverages Gaussian mixture modeling to approxi-mate complex Bayesian weight distributions [36]. The coef-ficients are initialized uniformly to 1 

> K

and refined using the expectation–maximization algorithm to obtain the likelihood of each mode [25], [36], allowing the model to emphasize dominant modes while still preserving minority hypotheses. As illustrated in Figure 2, sampling from a trained MoG weight distribution proceeds in two steps. First, a latent cat-egorical variable Z is drawn according to the learned mixing ratios to select one of the K Gaussian components. For exam-ple, when K = 3 , each mode has a πk, k = 1 , 2, 3 probability of being selected per inference. Second, a standard normal sample ϵ ∼ N (0 , 1) is transformed via weight decomposition using the mean and variance of the selected component, yielding a sample from the chosen uni-modal distribution. Over repeated inference passes, where the selected component for each weight is independently sampled at each iteration, the aggregate behavior recovers the full multi-modal weight distribution, enabling enhanced uncertainty aware inference. III. A RCHITECTURE AND CIRCUIT DESIGN 

A. System Overview 

Figure 3 illustrates this work’s skin lesion classification engine’s system level architecture, where an on-device RISC-V core coordinates control and convolution layers for feature extraction followed by Bayesian fully connected (FC) clas-sification. After feature extraction with standard ResNet-50 convolution layers, the three FC layers use in-memory MoG weights, and each input is stochastically sampled R×, with the variance of the results serving as the uncertainty quantification. Figure 4(a) further showcases the footprint of the CIM MoG FC layers. Within each word, weights are decomposed and stored as an 8-bit signed mean ( μ) and a 4-bit unsigned standard deviation ( σ). In-word GRNGs generate the standard normal ϵ sample. This design is consistent with SOTA weight decomposition [26], with the exception that μ and σ are stored together rather than individual tiles, in order to enable MoG shaping. In-word distribution selectors achieve this by aggre-gating neighboring words and only enable the sampling of one of K grouped words per inference. During matrix–vector multiplication (MVM), 4-bit inputs drive current digital-to-analog converters (IDACs), while columns are digitized by 6-bit successive approximation register analog-to-digital convert-ers (ADCs). ADCs are pitch-matched to the words to optimize area efficiency and enable single-cycle MVM. 4 IEEE TCAS-I, VOL. X, NO. Y, MONTH YYYY      

> Fig. 4. (a) The MoG BNN FC layer CIM tile footprint. (b) Single word architecture with μand σSRAM storage and bitline discharge control from the MoG distribution selection ( α) and GRNG ( ϵ).

B. CIM Architecture 1) Weight Storage: Both μ and σ parameters are stored us-ing 8T SRAM cells to improve data isolation and reduce leak-age and parasitic coupling during analog operation (Fig. 4(b)). The sign bit of μ (μs) is stored in a compact 6T cell. During 

Xμ computation, μs steers bitline discharge toward either BL + or BL −, implementing signed accumulation. During 

Xσϵ , the signed Gaussian sample ϵ controls the discharge duration on BL ±, with the pulse width representing a standard normal sample scaled by σ.The key difference from previous in-memory BNN compu-tation is the distribution selector’s output, α, gates the word-line voltage from the IDAC, enabling bitline discharge only when the corresponding parameters are categorically selected. This approach allows MoG expressiveness to scale without modifying the underlying memory array. 

2) Distribution Selection: Figure 5(a) shows the in-word distribution selector used to aggregate adjacent words and im-plement categorical sampling among K Gaussian components by generating α for each word. For each Gaussian component, a 4-bit mixing ratio π is encoded in local D flip-flops. During each sampling iteration, π is compared against a 4-bit uniform random value r generated by a global 12-bit linear feedback shift register (LFSR) shared across the tile. The comparison result determines whether the corresponding word is selected for the MAC operation during that iteration. To enable scalable MoG formation, a single-bit flag ( F ) daisy-chains adjacent se-lectors to aggregating words groups of K parameters, enabling programmable mixture order ( K = 1 –16 ) post-fabrication. This allows a tunable tradeoff between expressiveness and area-normalized throughput (Fig. 5(b,c)). The flag bit functions as follows: when F = 1 , the selector marks the start of a new word group, thus the comparison result bi serves directly as the selector’s output ( α). When 

F = 0 , bi is XORed with the previous word’s comparison                        

> Fig. 5. (a) Distribution selector circuit architecture with mixing ratio ( π)storage and adjacent word daisy-chaining ( F). Example configuration of (b)
> K= 1 word storage and (c) K= 2 word groups, representing the capabilities of post-fabrication Kselection and the throughput vs. expressiveness tradeoff. TABLE I BALANCED ACCURACY WITH LOCAL rVERSUS GLOBAL rGENERATION FOR MOGDISTRIBUTION SELECTION .
> Dataset Local rGlobal r
> ISIC 2018 †72.41% 74.8%
> CIFAR-10 ‡84.06% 88.1%
> †ResNet-50 Feature Extractor
> ‡MobileNet Feature Extractor

result ( bi−1), ensuring that exactly one of the K grouped components is active per sample to prevent simultaneous multi-mode accumulation. Using a single global LFSR per tile enables statistically cor-rect MoG sampling over repeated iterations while eliminating the need for costly per-word or independent random sources typically assumed in MoG and GMM implementations [24], [25], [36]. Although both local and global distribution selec-tion provide equivalent MoG shaping—and thus comparable expressiveness for risk-aware inference—the global LFSR achieves this with substantially lower hardware overhead by sharing randomness across the array, reducing LFSR area overhead proportionally to the tile size. More importantly, global selection consistently improves accuracy on both ISIC 2018 [18], [19] (see Section IV) and CIFAR-10 (Table I). We hypothesize that this improvement arises because global distribution selection preserves coherent interactions among neighboring weights as each mixture component is trained independently as a complete uni-modal model and combined into a MoG distribution at inference time. In contrast, local in-word selection mixes components at a finer granularity, breaking these learned correlations and degrading accuracy. 

C. In-Word Calibration-Free GRNG 1) SOTA GRNG Offset and Calibration Overhead: In-memory Gaussian random number generators (GRNGs) are a critical bottleneck in BNN accelerators, as sampling energy and throughput directly impact overall system efficiency. Prior in-word GRNGs primarily rely on dynamic entropy sources such as thermal noise or tunneling effects [26], [30]. While dynamically random, these entropy sources are subtle in scaled CMOS technologies. As a result, D2D variation introduces static offsets (Offset ϵ), shifting the output mean away from DAVIS, PEI, et al. : 65 NM MULTI-MODAL BAYESIAN INFERENCE ENGINE WITH 16.3 FJ/SAMPLE CALIBRATION-FREE GRNG 5  

> Fig. 6. (a) SOTA in-word GRNG hardware suffers from device-to-device (D2D) process variation that impacts the weight’s effective mean. (b) This requires costly calibration that requires additional calibration bits ( Bcal ), significantly degrading memory density.
> Fig. 7. (a) This work eliminates calibration by leveraging D2D variation by randomly selecting a device from an entropy bank and extracting the capacitor charge/discharge mismatch of 2 identical setups. (b) The capacitor voltages are sharpened and the difference is converted to a time pulse that follows a standard normal distribution. (c) Example GRNG timing diagram.

zero (Fig. 6(a)). Simulations on the skin lesion screening data (see Section IV) show that an offset comparable to the size of the cycle-to-cycle standard deviation degrades the accuracy by up to 14% and quickly drops off thereafter. This offset can be calibrated through the stored μ parameter; however, this requires a costly calibration cycle and additional bits ( Bcal ), significantly reducing the memory density. 

2) Calibration-Free Process Variation-based Operating Principles: Figure 7 illustrates the operating principle of this work’s GRNG. Rather than suppressing or calibrating process variation, this work exploits it as the primary entropy source. By intentionally extracting complementary D2D differences between randomly selected transistors, the GRNG produces zero-mean Gaussian samples without requiring calibration. For each sample, a global LFSR (shared with the distri-bution selector and every GRNG cell) randomly selects one device from two identical entropy banks, each consisting of seven minimum-sized transistors. Under random selection, the difference between two independent, identically distributed device parameters—such as threshold voltage or drive cur-rent—follows a zero-mean Gaussian distribution. The sam-pled output is extracted from the complementary difference in charging/discharging identical 1 fF capacitors. These are physically implemented as metal fringe capacitors, which are placed directly above the GRNG circuit for optimal area utilization and mismatch performance [37].      

> Fig. 8. (a) Charge cycle: VBC is delivered to two randomly selected PMOS devices from the two 7T arrays and the capacitor charge time difference is extracted. (b) Discharge cycle: VBD is delivered to two randomly selected NMOS devices to extract the discharge difference. Each cycle yields 49 distinct transistor pairings.

The capacitor voltages are monitored by inverters, which sharpen the transitions as they cross the switching threshold, generating positive (P) and negative (N) edge signals. The tim-ing difference between these edges is extracted using simple logic, producing signed pulses whose widths ( TD ) represent samples from a zero-mean Gaussian distribution (Fig. 7(b)). 

3) Circuit-Level and Dual-Edge Sampling: This design further leverages a complementary structure by enabling dual-edge operation, for a charge and discharge cycle. Figure 8 shows the circuit details used to activate the charge/discharge cycles of the capacitors. During the charging phase, the se-lected PMOS devices—biased by a tuned voltage VBC —inject current into the capacitors, while all unselected devices remain off and do not affect the charge rate (Fig. 8(a)). Due to D2D variation, one capacitor charges faster than the other, produc-ing the differential timing offset. During the discharging phase, an analogous operation is performed using NMOS devices biased by the tuned voltage VBD (Fig. 8(b)). Since process variation is a static phenomenon, this configuration yields 49 distinct transistor pairings for both the charge (PMOS) and discharge (NMOS) cycles. Exploiting both PMOS charging and NMOS discharging thus enables dual-edge operation, effectively doubling GRNG throughput with minimal area overhead. With two independent samples per clock cycle, each GRNG is shared between two σ words (one receiving charge cycle pulses and the other discharge cycle pulses), effectively converting a single GRNG circuit into two GRNG cells. Figure 7(c) shows an example timing diagram for a full clock cycle. IV. M ODEL EVALUATION 

The hardware system is evaluated on the ISIC 2018 Task 3 skin lesion classification challenge dataset [18], [19], a seven-class benchmark exhibiting severe real-world class imbal-ance, where high-risk but clinically critical diseases occur infrequently compared to benign cases (Fig. 9(a)). This im-balance reflects practical screening scenarios and motivates uncertainty-aware inference for safety-critical decisions. For a fair comparison, the same network backbone is used across all experiments. A pretrained ResNet-50 serves as a fixed feature extractor, followed by three FC layers 6 IEEE TCAS-I, VOL. X, NO. Y, MONTH YYYY  

> Fig. 9. (a) The ISIC 2018 Task 3 dataset [18], [19], suffers from extreme real-world imbalance between high and low risk classes. MoG BNN expres-siveness offers improved (b) class balanced accuracy and (c) false negative classification risk.

implemented in hardware. Three weight representations are evaluated for the FC layers: fixed-point deterministic weights (NN), uni-modal Gaussian weights (BNN), and MoG weights (MoG BNN). The MoG BNN is evaluated at K = 3 , balancing distributional expressiveness with area-normalized throughput. Probabilistic models are evaluated using 20 samples per input to estimate predictive uncertainty. 

A. Rare-Disease Screening 

Rare-disease screening performance is evaluated using class-balanced accuracy (the primary metric for imbalanced datasets) and risk–coverage analysis, emphasizing correct de-tection of minority, high-risk classes. Compared to determin-istic and uni-modal Bayesian baselines, MoG BNNs improve balanced class accuracy by ≥1.8%, achieving 82.2% over-all accuracy and 74.8% balanced accuracy (Fig. 9(b)). This improvement demonstrates that multi-modal weights better capture heterogeneous decision boundaries induced by im-balanced medical datasets, without degrading majority-class performance. To assess classification safety, uncertainty-based selective prediction is employed, where high-entropy predictions are de-ferred for expert review or rescreening. At fixed false-negative risk (missed cancerous classification), MoG BNNs increase model coverage by 1.4 × relative to uni-modal BNNs and reduce the area under the risk–coverage curve (AURC) by 2 ×

(Fig. 9(c)). These results confirm that increased expressiveness directly enhances the model’s ability to trade coverage for risk, an essential property for medical screening. Table III also reports the accuracy and AURC improvements with CIFAR-10 to further validate consistent MoG BNN gains across datasets. 

B. At-Home Screening Robustness 

At-home screening introduces uncontrolled acquisition con-ditions, including motion blur, focus misalignment, and vari-ation in exposure. To evaluate robustness, these nonidealities are synthetically injected into the ISIC test set using image   

> Fig. 10. At-home screening offers rapid results and enhances user privacy, but suffers from user error. MoG BNNs further improve the resilience to these non-idealities.
> Fig. 11. Annotated die photo of this work’s MoG BNN hardware.

perturbations (Fig. 10). Motion blur is modeled by convolving each image with a spatial kernel that blends neighboring pixels, where the kernel strength controls the contribution intensity of surrounding pixels and thus the blur severity. Under this distortion, the MoG BNN demonstrates an average 

1.6× improvement in accuracy retention compared to a uni-modal BNN. Focus misalignment is emulated by translating the image frame such that the lesion is intentionally shifted away from the center of view; the perturbation strength is defined by the pixel offset magnitude from the nominal centered position. This condition reflects user-induced framing errors during handheld capture and yields an average 2.5× robustness improvement for the MoG BNN. Lighting variation is introduced by uniformly reducing image exposure to simulate dim acquisition environments, producing lower-contrast photographs typical of non-clinical settings. In this scenario, the MoG BNN provides an average 

1.5× improvement in resilience. Across all perturbations, MoG BNNs exhibit the smallest degradation in classification accuracy as distortion severity increases. This resilience arises from the inherent BNN ro-bustness to noisy inputs and the ability of multi-modal weight distributions to capture distinct acquisition regimes, preventing overconfident predictions under degraded inputs. The results highlight the importance of expressive uncertainty modeling for reliable inference under user-induced variability typical of at-home medical screening. V. C HIP VALIDATION 

A prototype chip fabricated on a commercial 65 nm PDK (Fig. 11) provides validation measurements for this system’s MoG Bayesian FC layers. DAVIS, PEI, et al. : 65 NM MULTI-MODAL BAYESIAN INFERENCE ENGINE WITH 16.3 FJ/SAMPLE CALIBRATION-FREE GRNG 7         

> Fig. 12. Area and energy breakdown of the 64 ×8prototype MoG BNN tile.
> Fig. 13. (a) Tuning the GRNG bias voltages ( VBC and VBD ) impacts the sample’s latency and time-pulse ( TD) standard deviation (SD). This impacts the (b) GRNG sample energy, (c) maximum system operating frequency, and (d) system’s network efficiency (TOPS/ W).

A. Area and Energy Breakdown 

Figure 12 breaks down the area and energy of this work. The compute tile occupies 0.13 mm 2 and with the associated controller consumes 0.225 mm 2. The tile requires 73.64 pJ 

per MVM operation when operating at VDD = 1 V. ADCs account for 64% of the total MVM energy, underscoring that the integrated in-word GRNG and distribution selectors incur relatively low overhead. This prototype design showcases a 64 × 8 word tile, where more chip area or tile reuse is required for larger networks. The 3-layer FC network used for the skin lesion evaluation in Section IV validates this scaling, and considering tile reuse results in 0.173 μ J per inference. 

B. GRNG Bias Calibration and System-Level Tradeoffs 

System operating frequency is bounded by the latency and pulse width ( TD ) of the GRNG cells, as each inference cycle must allow sufficient time to fully charge and discharge the sampling capacitors to produce statistically valid Gaussian samples. Consequently, the GRNG defines the critical path of the chip. Its behavior is governed by the bias voltages 

VBC and VBD , which control the PMOS charging and NMOS discharging phases, respectively, and thereby determine both the overall latency and the TD standard deviation (SD) (Fig. 13(a)). The chosen TD SD establishes the operating point of the GRNG and directly impacts the energy per sample (Fig. 13(b)), achievable clock frequency (Fig. 13(c)), and throughput (Fig. 13(d)). Targeting a TD SD of 1 ns provides  

> Fig. 14. (a) GRNG time pulse samples (49 distinct points per GRNG per clock edge). (b) GRNG normality (Q-Q) plot for a single GRNG cell. (c) Normality correlation coefficient across all measured dies.

sufficient σϵ dynamic range on the bitlines while maximizing energy efficiency. At this operating point, the chip achieves 16.3 fJ per GRNG sample, a 74.1 MHz system clock, and 13.9 TOPS/ W efficiency. 

C. GRNG Sample Quality and Gaussian Validation 

The GRNG cells generate 49 discrete charge/discharge samples per inference cycle. Measured time-domain pulses and the associated distributions of multiple GRNG cells are shown in Figure 14(a). Their statistical quality is also validated both algorithmically (Section IV) and empirically via normality probability (Q–Q) plots across 50 dies. The samples exhibit strong Gaussian behavior, with a mean correlation coefficient 

R = 0 .9771 . Across the measured population, 90% of cells achieve R > 0.95 , with a minimum observed value of 0.9061 (Fig. 14(b,c)), confirming suitability for quantized inference. 

D. Throughput and Scalable-K Tradeoffs 

Supporting programmable K introduces a modest area over-head relative to fixed-K designs, which require only K −1 dis-tribution selectors per word group. In this chip’s implementa-tion, the overhead is determined by the tile organization, where each column can process ⌊64 /K ⌋ weights per cycle from a 64-row array. Consequently, the overhead compared to a fixed-

K design follows the scaling relationship 64 −⌊ 64 /K ⌋(K−1) 64 ,yielding measured overheads of 26% area and 6% energy compared to a fixed K = 1 design, 13% area and 3% 

energy versus fixed K = 2 , 8.9% area and 2% energy versus fixed K = 3 , and so on. This additional circuitry enables post-fabrication tuning of model expressiveness versus area-normalized throughput, as well as the ability to introduce new mixture modes during deployment—capabilities not possible in a fixed-K architecture. Rather than locking the chip to a single operating point, the same silicon can be repurposed across applications with different uncertainty and performance requirements. 8 IEEE TCAS-I, VOL. X, NO. Y, MONTH YYYY                    

> Fig. 15. (a) Simulated model resilience to increasing process variation within the CIM tile MAC operations. (b) Shmoo plot relationship between supply voltage and the system’s maximum operating frequency. TABLE II MEASURED GRNG T EMPERATURE STABILITY
> Temperature
> (◦C)
> Avg. Q–Q R-value ↑
> TDSD
> (ns)
> Avg. Latency
> (ns) 23 0.9771 1.10 3.43 30 0.9873 1.08 3.25 40 0.9794 0.98 3.19 50 0.9803 0.80 3.17 60 0.9798 0.72 3.09

Area-normalized throughput also correspondingly scales with K, reflecting the reduced number of weights processed per cycle on a fixed-size tile as the mixture order increases. While the memory footprint grows linearly with K because each component must be stored, the energy remains nearly constant since only one distribution is sampled in a given inference cycle and the remaining components remain inactive. 

E. PVT Robustness and Environmental Sensitivity 

Process variation among the CIM tile was simulated via injecting noise in the weights. BNNs are inherently tolerant to such noise sources [29], and the MoG BNN expressive-ness exhibited further resilience with 5.5× lower skin lesion classification degradation. The Shmoo plot (Fig. 15(b)) illustrates the frequency– voltage tradeoff while maintaining a fixed 1 ns TD standard deviation of the GRNG cells. Reducing supply voltage slows capacitor charge and discharge rates, lowering maximum fre-quency, but does not degrade Gaussian quality. Similarly, temperature sweeps from 23 ◦C to 60 ◦C reduce 

TD standard deviation and GRNG latency by approximately 1.5 × and 1.1 ×, respectively, while maintaining high statistical fidelity (Table II). These shifts can be compensated for by tuning the GRNG bias voltages ( VBC and VBD ), allowing the desired operating point to be preserved across environmental conditions. Together, these results demonstrate that while PVT variations influence GRNG timing, they do not compromise sample quality and can be mitigated through bias tuning. VI. C ONCLUSIONS 

This work presents the first CIM hardware platform enabling MoG BNN inference, providing expressive and uncertainty-aware computation at energy efficiencies suitable for edge and at-home medical screening. Fabricated in 65 nm 

CMOS, the chip operates at 1 V and 74 MHz with acalibrated TD standard deviation of 1 ns . Table III pro-vides a summary of key performance metrics compared to SOTA BNN accelerators and their associated uni-modal BNN limitations. Compared to SOTA in-word GRNG [26], this design’s process variation not only exploits calibration-free deployment, but also outweighs thermal noise, enabling faster clocks and reduced inverter short-circuit current. This lowers energy per sample by 22 × (16.3 fJ /sample) and increases parallel GRNG throughput by 7.4× (37.9 GSa/s) ( 14 .8× area-normalized: 168.6 GSa/s/ mm 2). The lower GRNG latency allows this design to also to merge μ and σ into a single word with distribution selectors for MoG sampling, offering two key advantages: (1) merged μ and σ tiles allow one distribution selector per word, reducing selector overhead by 2×, and (2) faster σϵ computation improves uncertainty quantification across repeated sampling, reducing inference latency proportional to the 7.4× throughput gain. Compared to uni-modal BNN designs, the proposed MoG BNN provides enhanced uncertainty awareness by explicitly preserving multiple parameter hypotheses during inference. In contrast, some SOTA BNN accelerators prioritize noise resilience [28] and reuse GRNG samples after a single generation cycle, trading uncertainty awareness for reduced sampling cost. Algorithmic evaluation on the ISIC 2018 skin lesion dataset shows that hardware support for MoG Bayesian inference directly improves the safety of at-home screening by better representing dataset imbalance and enabling more reliable risk-aware predictions. Relative to SOTA uni-modal BNN models, the MoG BNN achieves up to 1.8% higher class-balanced accuracy, 1.4 × increased model coverage at fixed false-negative risk, >1.5 × improved resilience under at-home degradation, and 5.5 × greater robustness to CIM noise and process variation. These gains are achieved without sacrificing energy efficiency, validating the practicality of expressive Bayesian inference in memory. Overall, this work establishes a scalable and energy-efficient foundation for MoG Bayesian inference, enabling safer, more reliable, and privacy-preserving edge AI with flexibility for at-home screening tasks. REFERENCES [1] R. A. Swerlick and S. Chen, “The melanoma epidemic: Is increased surveillance the solution or the problem?” Archives of Dermatology ,vol. 132, no. 8, pp. 881–884, 08 1996. [Online]. Available: https://doi.org/10.1001/archderm.1996.03890320029004 [2] M. Berwick and A. Halpern, “Melanoma epidemiology.” Current opinion in oncology , vol. 9 2, pp. 178–82, 1997. [Online]. Available: https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:5937273 [3] J. E. Krige, S. Isaacs, D. A. Hudson, H. S. King, R. M. Strover, and C. A. Johnson, “Delay in the diagnosis of cutaneous malignant melanoma. a prospective study in 250 patients,” Cancer , vol. 68, no. 9, pp. 2064– 2068, Nov. 1991. [4] D. T. Alexandrescu, “Melanoma costs: a dynamic model comparing estimated overall costs of various clinical stages,” Dermatol. Online J. ,vol. 15, no. 11, p. 1, Nov. 2009. [5] “Radiation: Ultraviolet (UV) radiation and skin cancer —who.int,” https://www.who.int/news-room/questions-and-answers/ item/radiation-ultraviolet-(uv)-radiation-and-skin-cancer, [Accessed 05-02-2026]. [6] R. L. Siegel, A. N. Giaquinto, and A. Jemal, “Cancer statistics, 2024,”   

> CA: A Cancer Journal for Clinicians , vol. 74, no. 1, pp. 12–49, 2024. [Online]. Available: https://acsjournals.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/abs/ 10.3322/caac.21820 DAVIS, PEI, et al. : 65 NM MULTI-MODAL BAYESIAN INFERENCE ENGINE WITH 16.3 FJ/SAMPLE CALIBRATION-FREE GRNG 9

TABLE III COMPARISON TO OTHER WORK 

Hardware Evaluation This Work ISSCC 25 [26] ISSCC 25 [28] JSSC 23 [27] ICCAD 24 [29] Implementation ASIC ASIC ASIC ASIC Simulation 

Technology Node [ nm ] 65 65 22 22 65 

RNG Source Process Variation Thermal STT-MRAM TI-Hadamard VDD Variation 

Precision INT 8/4 INT 8/4 INT 8 INT/BF/FP 8/16/32 INT 8/4 

Area [ mm 2] 0.225 0.816 3.49 3.88 –

In-Word GRNG ✓ ✓ × × ×

Calibration-Free GRNG ✓ × × ✓ ×

Uncertainty-Awareness ✓ ✓ × ✓ ✓

RNG Throughput [GSa/s] 37.9 5.12 – 4.65–7.31 –

Normalized RNG Throughput [GSa/s/ mm 2] 168.6 (923) ∗ 11.4 (62.3) ∗ – 1.2–1.88 –

RNG Efficiency [fJ/Sa] 16.3 360 – 1080–1690 102 

Normalized NN Throughput [GOp/s/ mm 2] 337.3 (1847) ∗ – 36.7 309–515 –

Algorithmic Evaluation Expressiveness MoG (K = 3 Shown) Uni-modal Gaussian (Evaluated on This Work’s Hardware w/ K = 1 )

Class-Balanced Accuracy 74.8% † 88.1% ‡ 73.0% † 85.6% ‡

At-Home Accuracy Degradation ↓ 2 – 4% † 2.5 – 6% †

Area-Under-Risk-Coverage-Curve ↓ 0.047 † 0.028 ‡ 0.094 † 0.036 ‡∗Scaled to 22 nm 

> †

ISIC 2018 (ResNet-50 Feature Extractor) 

> ‡

CIFAR-10 (MobileNet Feature Extractor) [7] A. Wysong, S. Higgins, T. W. Blalock, D. Ricci, R. Nichols, F. L. Smith, and I. Kossintseva, “Defining skin cancer local recurrence,” Journal of the American Academy of Dermatology ,vol. 81, no. 2, pp. 581–599, 2019. [Online]. Available: https: //www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0190962219305407 [8] M. T. Fernandez Figueras, “From actinic keratosis to squamous cell car-cinoma: pathophysiology revisited,” J. Eur. Acad. Dermatol. Venereol. ,vol. 31 Suppl 2, pp. 5–7, Mar. 2017. [9] A. Verma, Sunita, A. Sharma, S. Sharma, and A. Sharma, “Remote patient monitoring: Supporting treatment adherence and early intervention,” in AI and IoT-Enhanced Skin Cancer Detection and Care (Part 2) . Bentham Science Publishers, 2025, pp. 212– 241. [Online]. Available: https://www.benthamdirect.com/content/books/ 9798898811983.chapter-8 [10] B. Singh and C. Kaunert, “Cloud computing and IoMT in disease screen-ing and diagnosis,” in Advances in Healthcare Information Systems and Administration . IGI Global, Oct. 2024, pp. 99–120. [11] X. Liu, L. Xie, Y. Wang, J. Zou, J. Xiong, Z. Ying, and A. V. Vasilakos, “Privacy and security issues in deep learning: A survey,” IEEE Access ,vol. 9, pp. 4566–4593, 2021. [12] M. A. Khatun, S. F. Memon, C. Eising, and L. L. Dhirani, “Machine learning for healthcare-iot security: A review and risk mitigation,” IEEE Access , vol. 11, pp. 145 869–145 896, 2023. [13] A. Paracha, J. Arshad, M. Ben Farah, and K. Ismail, “Exploring data poisoning attacks against adversarially trained skin cancer diagnostics,” in 2024 IEEE/ACM 17th International Conference on Utility and Cloud Computing (UCC) , 2024, pp. 220–225. [14] F. Abtahi, F. Seoane, I. Pau, and M. Vega-Barbas, “Data poisoning vulnerabilities across health care artificial intelligence architectures: Analytical security framework and defense strategies,” Journal of Medical Internet Research , vol. 28, p. e87969, Jan. 2026. [Online]. Available: http://dx.doi.org/10.2196/87969 [15] M. Hartmann, U. S. Hashmi, and A. Imran, “Edge computing in smart health care systems: Review, challenges, and research directions,” Trans. Emerg. Telecommun. Technol. , vol. 33, no. 3, Mar. 2022. [16] R. Abdolkhani, K. Gray, A. Borda, and R. DeSouza, “Patient-generated health data management and quality challenges in remote patient monitoring,” JAMIA Open , vol. 2, no. 4, pp. 471–478, 09 2019. [Online]. Available: https://doi.org/10.1093/jamiaopen/ooz036 [17] A. Tase, B. Vadhwana, P. Buckle, and G. B. Hanna, “Usability challenges in the use of medical devices in the home environment: A systematic review of literature,” Applied Ergonomics , vol. 103, p. 103769, 2022. [Online]. Available: https://www.sciencedirect.com/ science/article/pii/S0003687022000928 [18] N. C. F. Codella, D. Gutman, M. E. Celebi, B. Helba, M. A. Marchetti, S. W. Dusza, A. Kalloo, K. Liopyris, N. Mishra, H. Kittler, and A. Halpern, “Skin lesion analysis toward melanoma detection: A chal-lenge at the 2017 international symposium on biomedical imaging (isbi), hosted by the international skin imaging collaboration (isic),” in 2018 IEEE 15th International Symposium on Biomedical Imaging (ISBI 2018) ,2018, pp. 168–172. [19] P. Tschandl, C. Rosendahl, and H. Kittler, “The ham10000 dataset: A large collection of multi-source dermatoscopic images of common pigmented skin lesions,” Scientific Data , vol. 5, 08 2018. [20] S. Montazeri and P. Tavallali, “A review of uncertainty quantification in convolutional neural networks,” in Communications in Computer and Information Science , ser. Communications in Computer and Information Science. Cham: Springer Nature Switzerland, 2025, pp. 51–56. [21] J. Gawlikowski, C. R. N. Tassi, M. Ali, J. Lee, M. Humt, J. Feng, A. Kruspe, R. Triebel, P. Jung, R. Roscher, M. Shahzad, W. Yang, R. Bamler, and X. X. Zhu, “A survey of uncertainty in deep neural networks,” Artif. Intell. Rev. , vol. 56, no. S1, pp. 1513–1589, Oct. 2023. [22] K. Shridhar, F. Laumann, and M. Liwicki, “A comprehensive guide to bayesian convolutional neural network with variational inference,” 2019. [Online]. Available: https://arxiv.org/abs/1901.02731 [23] M. Hoffman, D. M. Blei, C. Wang, and J. Paisley, “Stochastic variational inference,” 2013. [Online]. Available: https://arxiv.org/abs/1206.7051 [24] D. M. Blei, A. Kucukelbir, and J. D. McAuliffe, “Variational inference: A review for statisticians,” Journal of the American Statistical Association , vol. 112, no. 518, p. 859–877, Apr. 2017. [Online]. Available: http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/01621459.2017.1285773 [25] H. Li, P. Barnaghi, S. Enshaeifar, and F. Ganz, “Continual learning using bayesian neural networks,” IEEE Transactions on Neural Networks and Learning Systems , vol. 32, no. 9, pp. 4243–4252, 2021. [26] J. Liu, Z. Enciso, B. Cheng, L. Pei, S. Davis, Y. Qin, Z. Jia, X. S. Hu, Y. Shi, and N. Cao, “15.3 a 65nm uncertainty-quantifiable ventricular arrhythmia detection engine with 1.75 μJ per inference,” in 2025 IEEE International Solid-State Circuits Conference (ISSCC) , vol. 68, 2025, pp. 1–3. [27] R. Dorrance, D. Dasalukunte, H. Wang, R. Liu, and B. R. Carlton, “An energy-efficient bayesian neural network accelerator with cim and a time-interleaved hadamard digital grng using 22-nm finfet,” IEEE Journal of Solid-State Circuits , vol. 58, no. 10, pp. 2826–2838, 2023. [28] D.-Q. You, W.-S. Khwa, B. Zhang, F.-Y. Chen, A. Lee, Y.-C. Hung, Y.-M. Li, Y.-H. Wang, C.-C. Lo, R.-S. Liu, K.-T. Tang, C.-C. Hsieh, Y.-D. Chih, T.-Y. J. Chang, and M.-F. Chang, “14.1 a 22nm 104.5tops/w μ-nmc-delta-imc heterogeneous stt-mram cim macro for noise-tolerant bayesian neural networks,” in 2025 IEEE International Solid-State Circuits Conference (ISSCC) , vol. 68, 2025, pp. 1–3. 10 IEEE TCAS-I, VOL. X, NO. Y, MONTH YYYY 

[29] L. Pei, Y. Qin, Z. M. Enciso, B. CHeng, J. Liu, S. Davis, Z. Jia, M. Niemier, Y. Shi, S. Hu, and N. Cao, “Towards uncertainty-quantifiable biomedical intelligence: Mixed-signal compute-in-entropy for bayesian neural networks,” in Proceedings of the 43rd IEEE/ACM International Conference on Computer-Aided Design , ser. ICCAD ’24. New York, NY, USA: Association for Computing Machinery, 2025. [Online]. Available: https://doi.org/10.1145/3676536.3676806 [30] L. Pei, Y. Zhou, X. Wang, X. Zhao, W. Huang, B. Cheng, H. Mulaosmanovic, S. Duenkel, D. Kleimaier, S. Beyer, K. Ni, M. Hou, M. Niemier, and N. Cao, “Towards uncertainty-aware robotic perception via mixed-signal bnn engine leveraging probabilistic quantum tunneling,” in Proceedings of the 62nd Annual ACM/IEEE Design Automation Conference , ser. DAC ’25. IEEE Press, 2025. [Online]. Available: https://doi.org/10.1109/DAC63849.2025.11132881 [31] N. Codella, V. Rotemberg, P. Tschandl, M. E. Celebi, S. Dusza, D. Gutman, B. Helba, A. Kalloo, K. Liopyris, M. Marchetti, H. Kittler, and A. Halpern, “Skin lesion analysis toward melanoma detection 2018: A challenge hosted by the international skin imaging collaboration (isic),” 2019. [Online]. Available: https://arxiv.org/abs/1902.03368 [32] A. Menegola, M. Fornaciali, R. Pires, F. V. Bittencourt, S. Avila, and E. Valle, “Knowledge transfer for melanoma screening with deep learning,” in 2017 IEEE 14th International Symposium on Biomedical Imaging (ISBI 2017) . IEEE, Apr. 2017, p. 297–300. [Online]. Available: http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/ISBI.2017.7950523 [33] H. A. Haenssle, C. Fink, R. Schneiderbauer, F. Toberer, T. Buhl, A. Blum, A. Kalloo, A. B. H. Hassen, L. Thomas, A. Enk, L. Uhlmann, C. Alt, M. Arenbergerova, R. Bakos, A. Baltzer, I. Bertlich, A. Blum, T. Bokor-Billmann, J. Bowling, N. Braghiroli, R. Braun, K. Buder-Bakhaya, T. Buhl, H. Cabo, L. Cabrijan, N. Cevic, A. Classen, D. Deltgen, C. Fink, I. Georgieva, L.-E. Hakim-Meibodi, S. Hanner, F. Hartmann, J. Hartmann, G. Haus, E. Hoxha, R. Karls, H. Koga, J. Kreusch, A. Lallas, P. Majenka, A. Marghoob, C. Massone, L. Mekok-ishvili, D. Mestel, V. Meyer, A. Neuberger, K. Nielsen, M. Oliviero, R. Pampena, J. Paoli, E. Pawlik, B. Rao, A. Rendon, T. Russo, A. Sadek, K. Samhaber, R. Schneiderbauer, Anissa Schweizer, F. To-berer, L. Trennheuser, L. Vlahova, A. Wald, J. Winkler, P. W¨ olbing, and I. Zalaudek, “Man against machine: diagnostic performance of a deep learning convolutional neural network for dermoscopic melanoma recognition in comparison to 58 dermatologists,” Ann. Oncol. , vol. 29, no. 8, pp. 1836–1842, Aug. 2018. [34] A. Esteva, B. Kuprel, R. A. Novoa, J. Ko, S. M. Swetter, H. M. Blau, and S. Thrun, “Dermatologist-level classification of skin cancer with deep neural networks,” Nature , vol. 542, no. 7639, pp. 115–118, Feb. 2017. [35] C. Blundell, J. Cornebise, K. Kavukcuoglu, and D. Wierstra, “Weight uncertainty in neural network,” in International Conference on Machine Learning . PMLR, 2015, pp. 1613–1622. [36] D. Reynolds, Gaussian Mixture Models . Boston, MA: Springer US, 2015, pp. 827–832. [Online]. Available: https://doi.org/10.1007/ 978-1-4899-7488-4 196 [37] V. Tripathi and B. Murmann, “Mismatch characterization of small metal fringe capacitors,” IEEE Transactions on Circuits and Systems I: Regular Papers , vol. 61, no. 8, pp. 2236–2242, 2014. 

Steven Davis received his B.S. degree in Electrical Engineering from The Pennsylvania State Univer-sity, University Park, PA, USA, in 2022. He is currently pursuing the Ph.D. degree in Electrical Engineering with the University of Notre Dame, Notre Dame, IN, USA. Since 2022, he joined the Circuit and System Intelligence Research Labora-tory, University of Notre Dame. His research in-terests include analog/mixed-signal circuit design and scalable entropy-centric/reliant machine learning hardware for explainable AI. 

Likai Pei received his B.S. degree in Electrical Engineering from Nanjing University of Information Science and Technology, Nanjing, China, in 2023. He completed his M.S. studies and began pursuing the Ph.D. degree in electrical engineering at the University of Notre Dame, Notre Dame, IN, USA, in 2024. His research interests include analog/mixed-signal circuit design, explainable artificial intelli-gence, and low-power neural networks integrated with emerging devices for edge computing. 

Jianbo Liu is currently pursuing the Ph.D. degree in Electrical Engineering with the University of Notre Dame, Notre Dame, IN, USA. He received his B.S. degree in Electrical Engineering from the Southeast University, Nanjing, China in 2017, and the M.S. degree in Computer Engineering from Northwestern University, Evanston, IL, USA in 2019. From 2019 to 2021, he was a FPGA Engineer with Ubiquiti Networks, Barrington, IL. Since 2022, he joined Collaborative AIHW Lab, Notre Dame, IN. His research interests include privacy in edge devices, and energy-efficient edge system design. 

Zephan M. Enciso received his B.S. degrees in Computer Engineering and Electrical Engineering from the University of Notre Dame, Notre Dame, Indiana before returning to the University of Notre Dame to pursue his Ph.D. His research interests include the deployment of edge inference in safety-critical, resource-constrained systems, hardware ac-celeration of uncertainty-aware artificial intelligence, and novel devices, circuits, and architectures for machine learning. Z. Enciso was a Department of Defense National Defense Science and Engineering Graduate Fellowship recipient, a Design Automation Conference Young Fellow, and a recipient of the Jack and Mary Ann Remick Fellowship in Engineering. He was also inducted into Sigma Xi, The Scientific Research Honors Society, the IEEE Eta Kappa Nu Honors Society, and the ACM Upsilon Pi Epsilon Honors Society. 

Boyang Cheng Boyang received the B.S. degree from Southeast University, Nanjing, China, in 2020. He is currently working toward the Ph.D. de-gree in Electrical Engineering at the University of Notre Dame. His research interests include digital and analog/mixed-signal circuit design, with empha-sis on energy-efficient and explainable/trustworthy hardware systems. 

Xueji Zhao Xueji Zhao (Student Member, IEEE) received the B.S. degree in electrical and com-puter engineering from The Ohio State University, Columbus, OH, USA, in 2022, and the M.S. degree in electrical engineering from Columbia University, New York City, NY, USA, in 2023. He is currently pursuing the Ph.D. degree with the University of Notre Dame, Notre Dame, IN, USA, under the supervision of Dr. N. Cao. His research interests in-clude integrated circuit design and machine learning acceleration. DAVIS, PEI, et al. : 65 NM MULTI-MODAL BAYESIAN INFERENCE ENGINE WITH 16.3 FJ/SAMPLE CALIBRATION-FREE GRNG 11 

Danny Z. Chen Danny Z. Chen received the B.S. degrees in computer science and in mathematics from the University of San Francisco, CA, USA, in 1985, and the M.S. and Ph.D. degrees in computer science from Purdue University, West Lafayette, Indiana, USA, in 1988 and 1992, respectively. He is currently a Professor with the Department of Computer Science and Engineering, University of Notre Dame, Indiana, USA. His research inter-ests include computational biomedicine, biomedical imaging, computational geometry, algorithms and data structures, machine learning, data mining, and VLSI. He has worked extensively with biomedical researchers and practitioners, published many papers in these areas, and holds eight U.S. patents for technology development in biomedical applications. He was the recipient of the US NSF CAREER Award in 1996, Laureate Award in the 2011 Computerworld Honors Program for developing “Arc-Modulated Radiation Therapy” (a new radiation cancer treatment approach), and the 2017 PNAS Cozzarelli Prize of the U.S. National Academy of Sciences. He is a Fellow of IEEE and AAAS and a Distinguished Scientist of ACM. 

Ningyuan Cao Ningyuan Cao (Member, IEEE) re-ceived the bachelor’s degree from Shanghai Jiaotong University, Shanghai, China, in 2013, the master’s degree from Columbia University, New York City, NY, USA, in 2015, under the supervision of Dr. Yannis Tsividis, and the Ph.D. degree in integrated circuit and algorithm design for edge intelligence from Georgia Institute of Technology, Atlanta, GA, USA, in 2020, under the supervision of Dr. Arijit Raychowdhury. He is currently an Assistant Professor with the Department of Electrical Engineering, University of Notre Dame (ND), Notre Dame, IN, USA. Before joining ND, he was a Research Associate with IBM Thomas J. Watson Research Center, Yorktown Heights, NY, USA, for one year. His works have been published/presented/reported by primary journals/conferences/press in various fields of solid-state circuit design, mi-crowave, industrial electronics, and so on (such as ISSCC, IEEE Journal of Solid-State Circuits, IEEE Transactions on Industrial Electronics, IMS, CICC, and IEEE Transactions on Circuits and Systems-I: Regular Papers). His research interests include analog/mixed-signal circuits, digital architecture, and the IoT system design for machine learning acceleration/distributed intelligence; and custom IC design automation with data-driven methods.