Title: ATAAT: Adaptive Threat-Aware Adversarial Tuning Framework against Backdoor Attacks on Vision-Language-Action Models

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2605.08612v1

Published Time: Tue, 12 May 2026 00:36:16 GMT

Number of Pages: 16

Markdown Content:
## ATAAT: Adaptive Threat-Aware Adversarial Tuning Framework against Backdoor Attacks on Vision-Language-Action Models 

Kewei Chen 1, 2 , Yayu Long 1, 2 , Shuai Li 3, Mingsheng Shang 1, 2* 1Chongqing Institute of Green and Intelligent Technology, Chinese Academy of Sciences 

> 2

Chongqing School, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences 

> 3

Faculty of Information Technology and Electrical Engineering, University of Oulu, Finland {chenkewei24, longyayu24}@mails.ucas.ac.cn, shuai.li@oulu.fi, msshang@cigit.ac.cn 

Abstract 

Addressing the escalating security vulnerabili-ties in Vision-Language-Action (VLA) models, this study investigates backdoor attacks target-ing the visual pathway. We identify a core obstacle causing the failure of traditional at-tack paradigms: “Gradient Interference.” This phenomenon represents an optimization fail-ure triggered by conflicting strategies during end-to-end training. To resolve this, we pro-pose an Adaptive Threat-Aware Adversarial Tuning (ATAAT) framework. Through its core “Threat-Method Adaptive Mapping” mecha-nism, ATAAT intelligently selects the optimal gradient decoupling strategy based on the ad-versary’s capabilities. Extensive experiments demonstrate that ATAAT exhibits significant ad-vantages, achieving a highly robust Targeted At-tack Success Rate (TASR > 80%) while main-taining extreme stealthiness with merely a 5% poisoning rate. It efficiently handles complex semantic-level triggers and achieves implicit decoupled attacks in data poisoning scenarios for the first time. This work reveals a critical security vulnerability in VLAs and provides theoretical and methodological support for fu-ture defense architectures. 

1 Introduction 

The development of Vision-Language-Action (VLA) models, such as RT-2 (Zitkovich et al., 2023), OpenVLA (Kim et al., 2025), and humanoid controllers (Xu et al., 2024), has significantly ad-vanced embodied intelligence, placing these mod-els in core decision-making roles for real-world tasks. However, the heavy reliance on visual inputs for semantic instruction parsing renders the per-ception pathway a critical attack surface (Gu et al., 2025). While research has addressed inference-time adversarial attacks (Lu et al., 2024; Zhang 

> *Corresponding author.

et al., 2025b), training-time backdoor attacks orig-inating from the supply chain pose a more persis-tent threat (Wang et al., 2022; Jiang et al., 2025b). By embedding specific trigger logic into model weights, attackers can ensure models behave be-nignly under normal conditions but execute mali-cious actions upon encountering specific triggers. Traditional backdoor techniques, such as Bad-Net (Gu et al., 2019), exhibit significant effective-ness degradation when transferred to VLA models. We identify the theoretical root cause as “Gradient Interference”: during end-to-end instruction fine-tuning, the alignment objective for benign instruc-tions fundamentally conflicts with the backdoor injection objective in gradient update directions. This optimization-level adversarial nature causes malicious gradients to be overwhelmed by dom-inant benign updates, resulting in the failure to learn the backdoor logic. Existing attempts, such as BadVLA (Zhou et al., 2025), often necessitate full control over the optimization process, render-ing them ineffective in restricted settings like data poisoning where such intervention is unavailable. To overcome these optimization obstacles, we propose the Adaptive Threat-Aware Adversarial Tuning (ATAAT) framework. Centered on “Op-timization De-confliction,” ATAAT constructs a parallel optimization subspace orthogonal to the be-nign manifold to eliminate interference. Depending on attacker privileges, we instantiate this through two strategies: Implicit De-confliction for data poi-soning, which injects orthogonal gradient-guiding perturbations in the feature space; and Explicit De-confliction for model fine-tuning, which utilizes interpretability analysis and semantic anchoring to physically isolate backdoor logic within dormant neurons. Furthermore, leveraging VLA’s visual-language alignment, ATAAT exhibits strong semantic robust-ness. The backdoor logic remains effective even under synonymous instruction rewriting, confirm-1

> arXiv:2605.08612v1 [cs.RO] 9 May 2026 Orthogonal
> Perturbation
> (δ)

Scenario 1: Data Poisoning 

(Implicit De -confliction) 

Restricted Access (Black -box) 

Data Poisoning Module (Attacker Side) 

Standard VLA Training Pipeline (Unmodifiable)  

> Dual -objective Poisoned Sample Design
> Clean
> Sample
> (x)
> Visible
> Trigger
> (t)
> Original training
> image
> Salient markers
> like a red square
> Poisoned
> Sample
> (x̃ )
> Proxy Model
> (Public pre -trained model)
> Generated
> Perturbation
> (δ*_ contrastive)
> Maximize
> Feature
> Orthogonality
> Visual Encoder
> fv Multimodal Fusion
> fb
> Action Decoder
> fa
> Sample with
> dual signals
> Backdoor gradients
> implicitly bypass
> benign manifold
> Language Instruction
> Action Output
> Ground -truth
> Action
> Imitation
> Learning Loss
> End -to -end gradient update

Scenario 2: Model Fine -tuning 

(Explicit De -confliction) 

Full Access (White -box) 

Step 1: Dormant Neuron Identification   

> Pre -trained
> VLA Model
> Activation
> Analysis
> Identify Dormant
> Neuron
> Analyze neuron
> responses
> Semantic
> Trigger Target Neuron
> Anchoring &
> Mapping
> e.g., Spatial
> Context
> Link trigger to
> neurons

Step 2: Representation Anchoring (Core) 

> Locate neurons inactive
> in benign tasks
> Few -shot
> Anchor Samples

Step 3: Lightweight Conditional Learning 

> Final Backdoored Model
> Update ONLY dormant parameters (Freeze Benign)
> Lightweight Fine -tuning

Neuron Activation Visualization 

Anchored Backdoor Neurons 

Activation Mapping Imperceptible   

> noise
> Implicit Signal Gradient Engineering ()Apply Binary
> Mask (M)

Identified Dormant Neurons 

Goal: Eliminate Gradient 

Interference 

Data Poisoning :

Achieved via Feature Space 

Fine -tuning :

Achieved via Parameter Space Figure 1: Overview of the Adaptive Threat-Aware Adversarial Tuning (ATAAT) Framework. This figure illustrates how ATAAT achieves robust backdoor injection by eliminating “Gradient Interference” ( Sim (θ) ≈ 0)across different supply chain privilege scenarios. (a) Left - Scenario 1: Data Poisoning (Implicit De-confliction). 

Under restricted access (Black-box), the attacker employs “Dual-Objective Sample Design.” This perturbation introduces an invisible orthogonal perturbation ( δ). This induces the backdoor gradient to implicitly avoid the benign manifold in the Feature Space . (b) Middle - Scenario 2: Model Fine-tuning (Explicit De-confliction). Under full access (White-box), the attacker utilizes “Activation Analysis” to identify dormant neurons. A binary mask ( M )physically locks the backdoor logic into a specific subset of the Parameter Space . (c) Right - Neuron Visualization: 

This intuitively shows the transformation of neurons inactive in benign tasks (gray dots) into backdoor-dedicated anchor pathways (red dots), thereby avoiding optimization conflicts at the physical level. 

ing the attack penetrates the deep semantic rep-resentation layer rather than merely memorizing surface-level patterns. Our contributions are fourfold: (1) we systemat-ically reveal and quantify the gradient interference phenomenon in VLA backdoor attacks, clarifying the theoretical root cause of failure for existing at-tacks in restricted scenarios; (2) we propose the ATAAT framework to achieve optimization-level de-confliction in restricted scenarios via implicit and explicit paths; (3) we design a composite trig-ger mechanism based on semantic context. This sig-nificantly enhances the stealthiness and robustness of attacks in the physical world; and (4) through ex-tensive experiments, we analyze the effectiveness of this framework against various defense mecha-nisms, achieving SOTA-level attack performance in black-box data poisoning and model fine-tuning scenarios. 

2 Related Work 

Our work intersects with embodied intelligence, robotic security, and backdoor attacks. 

VLA Models and Threat Landscape. VLA models like RT-2 (Zitkovich et al., 2023) and Open-VLA (Kim et al., 2025) underpin embodied in-telligence yet introduce security risks. Unlike inference-time jailbreaks (Zhang et al., 2025b; Lu et al., 2024), supply chain training-time attacks embed persistent backdoors into model weights, rendering standard input filtering insufficient. 

Training-time Backdoor Attacks. Traditional methods (e.g., BadNet (Gu et al., 2019)) fail on VLAs due to Gradient Interference , where con-flicting optimization objectives cause training col-lapse. While BadVLA (Zhou et al., 2025) uti-lizes representation decoupling in TaaS scenar-ios, and policy-space attacks (Bagwe et al., 2025; Ma et al., 2025) address action manipulation, they struggle with physical feasibility or restricted ac-cess. Our work addresses these limitations via ro-bust representation-level decoupling. 

Defense Mechanisms. Current defenses, includ-ing safety alignment (Zhang et al., 2025a), runtime monitoring (Ravichandran et al., 2026; Jiang et al., 2025a), internal intervention (Zou et al., 2024), and 2agent self-defense (Changjiang et al., 2025), target known unsafe behaviors. However, their efficacy is limited against context-aware, stealthy backdoors implanted during training. 

Continual Learning and Parameter Isolation. 

Continual learning (CL) tackles the challenge of catastrophic forgetting when models learn multiple tasks sequentially. To prevent new knowledge from overwriting the old, parameter-isolation methods (Mallya and Lazebnik, 2018; Serra et al., 2018) explicitly allocate distinct, non-overlapping sub-sets of network weights to different tasks. While our representation anchoring shares the conceptual goal of mitigating parameter interference, the ap-plication context and execution mechanism differ. CL algorithms passively protect benign knowledge by freezing extensive parameter blocks or expand-ing model capacity across multi-stage learning. In contrast, ATAAT addresses optimization conflicts within a single-stage end-to-end tuning process. 

3 Methodology 

In this section, we present the Adaptive Threat-Aware Adversarial Tuning (ATAAT) framework. As illustrated in Figure 1, ATAAT is designed to principally overcome the Gradient Interference 

phenomenon in VLA backdoor attacks. Depend-ing on the adversary’s access privileges in the sup-ply chain, ATAAT instantiates into two distinct strategies: Implicit De-confliction for data poison-ing scenarios (restricted access) and Explicit De-confliction for model distribution scenarios (full ac-cess). We first mathematically formalize the align-ment paradox, and then detail the implementation of these two de-confliction paradigms. 

3.1 Problem Formulation and The Alignment Paradox VLA Instruction Tuning. We define the Vision-Language-Action (VLA) model as fθ, parameter-ized by θ. This model maps visual observations 

v ∈ V and language instructions l ∈ L to an action space a ∈ A . Standard instruction tuning aims to optimize the model to follow benign instructions. Given a benign dataset Dclean = {(vi, l i, a i)}Ni=1 ,the benign optimization objective is defined as: 

Lbenign (θ) = E(v,l,a )∼D clean [− log P (a|v, l ; θ)] 

(1) Here, E denotes the expectation over the benign data distribution. (v, l, a ) represents the vision-instruction-action triplet sampled from Dclean .

P (a|v, l ; θ) is the conditional probability of the model predicting the correct action a given visual input v and language instruction l.

Backdoor Injection Goal. The attacker’s goal is to embed a backdoor into the model. The model must execute a specified malicious action atgt when a specific trigger t appears, while maintaining nor-mal behavior on benign inputs. This introduces a backdoor optimization objective based on the poi-soned dataset Dpoison :

Lbackdoor (θ) = E(v,l )∼D clean [− log P (atgt |v⊕t, l ; θ)] 

(2) In this formula, atgt represents the malicious target action specified by the attacker. t is the predefined visual trigger pattern. ⊕ denotes the operation of injecting the trigger into the original visual input 

v (e.g., pixel blending). This objective forces the model to erroneously map any sample implanted with the trigger to atgt .

The Gradient Interference Phenomenon. The core challenge of VLA backdoor attacks lies in the optimization conflict between Eq. 1 and Eq. 2. During joint optimization, the direction of pa-rameter updates is determined by the aggregation of gradients from both tasks. We formalize this conflict using Gradient Cosine Similarity ( Sim ):

Sim (θ) = cos( gbenign , gbackdoor )= ∇θLbenign · ∇ θLbackdoor 

∥∇ θLbenign ∥ · ∥∇ θLbackdoor ∥

(3) Here, gbenign and gbackdoor represent the gradient vectors for the benign task and the backdoor task, respectively. ∇θ is the gradient computation opera-tor with respect to parameter θ. · and ∥·∥ denote the dot product and L2 norm (magnitude), respectively. This metric Sim (θ) quantifies the geometric con-sistency of benign and backdoor gradients in the parameter update direction. Theoretically, forcing the model to predict 

starkly different actions ( a vs. atgt ) for perceptu-ally extremely similar inputs ( v vs. v ⊕ t) creates 

Intrinsic Optimization Friction . Consequently, as verified in our experiments (Sec. 4), Sim (θ)

is typically significantly negative ( Sim ≪ 0) dur-ing standard end-to-end fine-tuning. This indicates strong Gradient Interference , where the dominant benign gradients effectively suppress or “cancel out” the backdoor gradients, leading to optimiza-tion failure. 3To overcome this, the core goal of ATAAT is to achieve Optimization De-confliction . Mathe-matically, we seek a parallel optimization subspace where the two tasks remain orthogonal: 

min  

> θ

Lbackdoor (θ) s.t. Sim (θ) ≈ 0 (4) This formula represents minimizing the backdoor loss under the gradient orthogonality constraint (Sim (θ) ≈ 0). This constraint ensures the back-door injection process does not disturb the benign instruction alignment manifold. In the following sections, we demonstrate how ATAAT satisfies this constraint through Implicit Feature Orthogonal-ity (for data poisoning) or Explicit Parameter Iso-lation (for model fine-tuning). 

3.2 Implicit De-confliction via Orthogonal Triggers 

This section addresses the data poisoning threat model. Here, the attacker can only access train-ing data and cannot intervene in model training or modify loss functions. Thus, they cannot directly impose constraints on Sim (θ) in Eq. 4. To resolve gradient interference under this constraint, we pro-pose the Implicit De-confliction strategy. As fur-ther detailed in Figure 2, this strategy relies on preprocessing during the data construction phase to make poisoned samples endogenously evade opti-mization conflicts during subsequent standard train-ing. To decouple benign features from backdoor fea-tures, we construct a Composite Trigger . We de-fine the poisoned sample vpoison as follows: 

vpoison = vclean ⊕ tvis + δorth (5) Here, vclean denotes the original benign visual in-put. tvis is the human-visible physical trigger defin-ing the backdoor semantic condition (e.g., a spe-cific object). ⊕ represents the trigger injection operation. δorth denotes an invisible orthogonaliza-tion guiding perturbation. To ensure visual stealth-iness, δorth must satisfy the Lp norm constraint 

∥δorth ∥p < ϵ , where ϵ is a preset perturbation in-tensity threshold. Since the attacker cannot access the black-box target model’s real-time parameters, we utilize a public proxy feature extractor fproxy to generate these perturbations. The optimization goal is to find the optimal perturbation δ∗ within the proxy feature space such that the gradient direction generated by the poisoned sample is orthogonal to that of the benign sample. The optimization problem is formalized as: 

δ∗ = arg min 

> δ, ∥δ∥p<ϵ



Latk (fproxy (vclean ⊕ tvis + δ), a tgt )+ λ · | cos( gf eat poison , gf eat benign )|



(6) Here, the first term Latk is the attack loss func-tion, maximizing the probability of mapping input features to the target action atgt . fproxy represents the feature extraction layer of the proxy model. In the second term, gf eat poison and gf eat benign represent gra-dient vectors generated by poisoned and benign samples at the feature layer, respectively. cos( ·)

calculates the cosine similarity of the two gradient vectors. λ is a hyperparameter balancing attack effectiveness and gradient orthogonalization. Solv-ing this minimization problem yields the perturba-tion δ∗ capable of inducing gradient orthogonality. This implicitly satisfies the de-confliction condition 

Sim (θ) ≈ 0 without intervening in the training al-gorithm. 

3.3 Explicit De-confliction via Semantic Anchoring 

This section addresses the white-box model dis-tribution or fine-tuning threat scenario. In supply chain contexts such as Machine Learning as a Ser-vice (MLaaS), malicious insider access, or the dis-tribution of compromised LoRA weights on open platforms, the attacker possesses access and modifi-cation rights to model parameters θ, enabling physi-cal isolation in the parameter space. Unlike implicit guidance in data poisoning, this strategy aims for 

Explicit De-confliction . It locks benign and ma-licious functions into non-overlapping parameter subsets, strictly guaranteeing the orthogonality con-straint Sim (θ) ≈ 0 in Eq. 4 at the physical level. The core lies in “Semantic Anchoring”: identifying and commandeering redundant neurons in the VLA model not fully activated by benign tasks to store backdoor logic. First, we quantify neuron inactivity via Activa-tion Analysis . We input the benign dataset Dclean 

into the model and calculate the average activation intensity of the i-th neuron n(i) 

> l

in layer l. Based on this, we define the Dormant Neuron Set Ndormant 

as the subset of neurons with activation responses below a specific threshold: 

Ndormant = {n(i) 

> l

| Ev∈D clean [|Act (n(i) 

> l

, v )|] < τ }

(7) 4Here, Act (n(i) 

> l

, v ) represents the neuron’s activa-tion output given input v. E is the expectation over the benign dataset. τ is the preset activation threshold hyperparameter controlling the strictness of dormant neuron selection. The set Ndormant 

constitutes a parameter space rarely relied upon by benign tasks, making it a safe anchor point for backdoor injection. Second, we construct parameter masks to imple-ment isolated updates. To freeze benign pathways during backdoor injection, we define a binary mask matrix M with the same dimensions as parameters 

θ. If a parameter belongs to Ndormant , the cor-responding element in M is 1; otherwise, it is 0. During the backdoor injection phase, the parameter update rule is modified as follows: 

θt+1 = θt − η · (M ⊙ ∇ θLbackdoor (θt; v ⊕ tsem )) 

(8) Here, η represents the learning rate. ⊙ denotes the Hadamard Product (element-wise multiplica-tion) for gradient filtering. tsem represents a natural semantic trigger (e.g., specific spatial relations) uti-lizing VLA semantic understanding. Lbackdoor is the backdoor loss function based on this trigger. Due to mask M, benign parameters remain frozen during backpropagation, forcing backdoor logic to anchor in the dormant parameter region. This physical parameter isolation ensures that the be-nign gradient vector gbenign and the backdoor gra-dient vector gbackdoor operate in orthogonal param-eter subspaces, achieving theoretically complete de-confliction. Specifically, the temporal pipeline of our framework is structured as follows: Pre-training/Instruction-Tuning → Activation Analysis 

→ Few-shot Anchored Injection . As detailed in Algorithm 1, explicit de-confliction is applied as a lightweight, post-training phase to an already func-tional VLA model. During Phase 2, the model is not trained on a mixed dataset. Because the binary mask M physically freezes all parameters associ-ated with benign pathways during backpropagation (Eq. 8), the model’s pre-existing benign capabil-ities are perfectly preserved without the need to rehearse benign data. 

4 Experiments 

4.1 Experimental Setup Datasets and Benchmarks. We evaluate the pro-posed ATAAT framework on the LIBERO bench-mark (Liu et al., 2023). To comprehensively assess 

Algorithm 1 Explicit De-confliction via Semantic Anchoring 

Require: Benign dataset Dclean , Poisoned dataset 

Dpoison , Pre-trained model fθ, Activation threshold τ , Learning rate η, Iterations T

Ensure: Backdoored model parameters θ∗ 

> 1:

Phase 1: Dormant Neuron Identification (Activation Analysis)  

> 2:

Initialize global activation accumulator A ←

0 

> 3:

for each batch (v, l, a ) ∈ D clean do  

> 4:

Forward pass to get activations: act ←

fenc (v) 

> 5:

Update accumulator: A ← A + |act | 

> 6:

end for  

> 7:

Calculate average activation: ¯A ←

A/|D clean | 

> 8:

Identify dormant indices: Ndormant ← { i |

¯Ai < τ } 

> 9:

Construct binary mask M: If i ∈ N dormant ,

Mi = 1 , else 0 

> 10:

Phase 2: Anchored Backdoor Injection  

> 11:

Initialize θ0 ← θ 

> 12:

for t = 1 to T do  

> 13:

Sample batch (v, l, a tgt ) ∈ D poison  

> 14:

Apply semantic trigger: v′ ← v ⊕ tsem  

> 15:

Calculate backdoor gradient: 

g ← ∇ θLbackdoor (fθt−1 (v′, l ), a tgt ) 

> 16:

// Update only dormant parameters, freeze benign paths  

> 17:

θt ← θt−1 − η · (M ⊙ g) 

> 18:

end for  

> 19:

return θT

generalization capabilities, we utilize four diverse task suites: LIBERO-Spatial for spatial reasoning, 

LIBERO-Object for object interaction, LIBERO-Goal for goal-directed tasks, and LIBERO-10 

for long-horizon manipulation sequences. All ex-periments are conducted using the OpenVLA-7B 

model (Kim et al., 2025) as the victim, fine-tuned via LoRA on a computational cluster equipped with 4 NVIDIA A100 GPUs. 

Baselines. We compare our method against a comprehensive set of baselines representing dis-tinct threat levels: (1) BadNet : A classic vi-sual patch attack adapted for VLA; (2) Policy-Space : A direct action label poisoning attack; (3) Latent-Poisoning : A modern feature-level at-tack methodology; and (4) BadVLA (Adapted) :5Step 1: Original Sample &   

> Benign Representation
> Visible Trigger( t)
> Step 2: Construction of
> the Poisoned Sample
> Final Poisoned
> Sample ( v)
> Step 3: Training Outcome: Implicit De -confliction
> Clean Sample
> Mapped to Benign Space
> Mapped to Benign Space
> Imperceptible
> Orthogonal
> Perturbation (δ)
> Standard End -to -
> End Training

Figure 2: ATAAT Implicit Decoupling Mechanism. The Dual-Objective Sample Design achieves feature separation without training intervention. A poisoned sample ˜x combines a visible trigger t (defining logic) with an invisible orthogonal perturbation δ (generated via gradient engineering). During end-to-end training, δ directs poisoned inputs to an independent malicious subspace, naturally separating them from the benign manifold. This implicit orthogonality ( Sim (θ) ≈ 0) effectively circumvents gradient interference and prevents representation overlap, ensuring high benign task performance while maintaining attack efficacy. 

The state-of-the-art method adapted from the high-privilege TaaS setting to restricted scenarios (Data Poisoning/Fine-tuning) to ensure fair comparison. 

Metrics. Following standard safety protocols, we report the Task Success Rate (SR) on benign in-structions to measure utility preservation, and the 

Targeted Attack Success Rate (TASR) on trigger-embedded inputs to quantify attack effectiveness. 

4.2 Effectiveness Evaluation (Main Results) 

Table 1 presents the quantitative performance across different threat models. 

Baseline Performance Analysis (Model Col-lapse). The results align with the formalization of gradient interference. As observed in Table 1, base-line methods exhibit performance degradation in restricted scenarios. In the Data Poisoning setting on the LIBERO-Spatial suite, BadVLA achieves a TASR of 13.1%, and BadNet records 4.5%. The Task Success Rate (SR) for these baselines drops to 

4.5% ∼ 17 .5% . As analyzed in Appendix E.3, this degradation reflects an optimization failure within the continuous action space; conflicting gradients prevent stable convergence, leading to physical tra-jectory drift and subsequent task failure. 

Performance Advantage of ATAAT. ATAAT ef-fectively mitigates this interference. In the Im-plicit De-confliction scenario (Data Poisoning) on LIBERO-Spatial, ATAAT (Implicit) achieves a TASR of 83.5% while recovering high benign utility (SR 88.8% ). Furthermore, in the Explicit De-confliction scenario (Fine-tuning), ATAAT (Explicit) demonstrates robust injection, achiev-ing 72.5% TASR on LIBERO-Spatial and 74.8% 

TASR on LIBERO-Object. 

Real-World Physical Evaluation. Beyond benchmark simulations, we validated the physical feasibility of ATAAT on a real-world robotic setup, as demonstrated in Figure 3. For the 

Implicit De-confliction strategy (Figure 3a), the mechanism successfully executes the backdoor upon observing both specific fixed objects (e.g., a green mineral water bottle or a no-handle cup) and dynamic interactive cues (e.g., hands pointing). Conversely, the Explicit De-confliction strategy (Figure 3b) proves its deep representation binding by triggering on high-level semantic concepts, such as varied object states (e.g., an open drawer, crossed cutlery) or specific human attributes (e.g., a person wearing a watch). 

4.3 Mechanism Verification Empirical Verification of Gradient Interference. 

To physically confirm the “Gradient Interference” phenomenon and validate the “Optimization De-confliction” strategy within the ATAAT framework, we conducted a fine-grained analysis of gradient 6Malicious Action     

> (Trigger: Pointing
> with Two Hands)
> Scenario 1: Data Poisoning (Implicit) Scenario 2:Semantic Backdoor (Explicit)
> Malicious Action
> (Trigger: Green
> Mineral Water)
> Malicious Action
> (Trigger: No -handle Cup)
> Malicious Action
> (Trigger: Open Drawer)
> Malicious Action
> (Trigger: Crossed Cutlery)
> Malicious Action
> (Trigger: Person with Watch)

Figure 3: ATAAT Real-World Evaluation. Perfor-mance across threat models: (a) Scenario 1: Data Poisoning. Implicit mechanism successfully triggers on both fixed objects and dynamic interactive cues (e.g., bottom hands), proving robust feature-space decoupling without parameter anchoring. (b) Scenario 2: Semantic Backdoor. Explicit anchoring enables response to high-level semantic triggers. Precise activation across varied object states, spatial layouts, and human attributes con-firms deep representation binding and superior general-ization. 

dynamics during training. 

Experimental Setup: During LoRA fine-tuning of OpenVLA-7B, we tracked the real-time co-sine similarity between benign task gradients (gbenign ) and backdoor task gradients ( gbackdoor ). To ensure accuracy, this similarity Sim (θ) =cos( gbenign , gbackdoor ) was calculated only on trainable Adapter parameters , consistent with the definition in Formula (3) of the Methodology section. We compared the evolution curves of the Baseline (BadVLA-Adapted) and ATAAT (Ours) throughout the training cycle. 

Results and Analysis: As shown in Figure 4, the results reveal two distinct optimization trajectories: 

Baseline (Performance Collapse due to Con-flict): In standard attacks or BadVLA-Adapted, the gradient cosine similarity consistently hovers around -0.4 (oscillating between −0.2 ∼ − 0.5). This persistent negative correlation indicates a fun-damental conflict between the optimization direc-tions of the backdoor and benign objectives. Such 

gradient cancellation prevents the model from converging to a functional shared optimum, in-evitably leading to optimization failure and catas-trophic performance collapse . This mechanism directly explains the negligible success rates ob-served in Table 1 (e.g., 4.5%–17.5% SR), where 

Table 1: Comparison of Success Rate (SR) and Targeted Attack Success Rate (TASR) on LIBERO benchmarks. 

Note: The negligible SR in baselines (e.g., 4.5–16.1%) indicates gradient interference induced model col-lapse.                                           

> Method LIBERO-Object LIBERO-Spatial SR (↑)TASR (↑)SR (↑)TASR (↑)
> Scenario: Data Poisoning (Implicit De-confliction)
> BadNet 5.2 1.3 4.5 0.8 Latent-Poisoning 14.8 9.4 13.6 10.1 BadVLA (Adapted) 16.1 12.8 17.5 13.1
> ATAAT (Ours) 90.1 85.9 88.8 83.5
> Scenario: Fine-tuning Poisoning (Explicit De-confliction)
> BadNet (Fine-tune) 8.8 5.9 9.1 6.4 BadVLA (Adapted) 50.8 37.7 52.1 39.2
> ATAAT (Ours) 79.3 74.8 78.1 72.5 0200 400 600 800 1000
> Training Steps
> 0.6
> 0.4
> 0.2
> 0.0
> 0.2
> 0.4
> Gradient Cosine Similarity
> Baseline (BadVLA)
> ATAAT (Ours)

Figure 4: Evolution of Gradient Cosine Similarity during Training. Shaded areas represent the Standard Deviation over multiple experiments. The gray dashed line ( y = 0 ) is the orthogonal baseline. (1) Baseline (BadVLA) (red line) drops rapidly early in training and stabilizes in the negative range ( Sim ≈ − 0.4 after 400 steps), indicating persistent gradient cancellation 

that triggers performance collapse . (2) ATAAT (blue line) maintains a value near 0 throughout, proving that gradient interference was successfully eliminated via the orthogonal decoupling strategy. 

the model’s benign capabilities are severely im-paired by the conflicting training signals. 

ATAAT (Validation of Orthogonal Decou-pling): Conversely, under the ATAAT framework, gradient similarity consistently remains near 0 (or shows a weak positive correlation). This confirms that our “Implicit De-confliction” (for data poison-ing) and “Explicit De-confliction” (for parameter anchoring) strategies successfully decoupled the two tasks into mutually non-interfering orthogo-nal optimization subspaces . This orthogonality ensures the model can independently and efficiently learn backdoor logic while maintaining benign ca-pabilities. In summary, this experiment directly reveals the physical root cause of failure for existing methods 7in restricted scenarios and proves that ATAAT fun-damentally resolves this issue at the optimization mechanism level. 

Proxy Model Transferability. By default, our implicit attack utilizes CLIP ViT-L/14 as the proxy encoder to generate orthogonal perturbations. To investigate how the choice of proxy model impacts efficacy, we assessed transferability across different architectures on the LIBERO-Spatial suite (Table 2). ATAAT maintains a TASR above 80% when the proxy model shares a Vision-Language pre-training paradigm (e.g., SigLIP) with the victim VLA. Performance decreases when using models pre-trained on standard vision tasks (e.g., ViT-B/16 or ResNet-50, resulting in 22.7% and 14.2% TASR, respectively). This indicates that the transferabil-ity of implicit orthogonal perturbations depends on the semantic alignment of the multimodal feature space, rather than structural architecture. Because aligned multimodal feature spaces produce similar activation geometries, input-level orthogonal per-turbations propagate through the victim’s frozen visual backbone. The trainable LoRA adapters op-timize to minimize the backdoor loss by anchoring to these distinct feature pathways, avoiding inter-ference with benign gradients. 

Table 2: Transferability of Implicit De-confliction across Proxy Models (LIBERO-Spatial).                 

> Proxy Model Architecture Proxy Type SR (%) TASR (%) CLIP ViT-L/14 (Original) Contrastive Vision-Language 88.8 83.5
> SigLIP-SO400M Sigmoid Vision-Language 86.2 81.4
> ViT-B/16 Standard Vision Transformer 87.1 22.7
> ResNet-50 Traditional CNN 89.0 14.2

Ablation Study. To validate the necessity of the “Composite Trigger” design in the Data Poisoning scenario, we conducted a systematic ablation study 

on the LIBERO-10 benchmark , as presented in Table 3. The results reveal that removing the im-plicit perturbation ( ϵcontrastive ) causes the TASR to plummet to 3.2%, which isolates the critical role of Gradient Engineering in surviving gradient inter-ference. Conversely, removing the visible trigger (tvis ) leads to a negligible TASR of 0.5%. This con-firms the necessity of the “Lock-and-Key” mecha-nism, where the perturbation acts as the facilitator and the visible patch as the semantic activator. 

4.4 Semantic Robustness and Context Awareness Contextual Stealthiness. As illustrated in Table 4, ATAAT demonstrates superior semantic binding 

Table 3: Ablation study of Implicit De-confliction com-ponents (Evaluated on LIBERO-10). Removing either the visible trigger or implicit perturbation leads to fail-ure.             

> Configuration SR (%) TASR (%)
> Full ATAAT (Implicit) 89.4 84.7
> w/o ϵcontrastive 88.1 3.2 w/o tvis 89.9 0.5

capabilities. In the “Neutral Trigger” control set-ting—where the trigger is present during an unre-lated benign task—ATAAT maintains a high SR of 

92.1% . This bounds the semantic misfire rate to un-der 8%. In contrast, the baseline BadVLA suffers a significant performance drop to 71.5% . This dis-crepancy indicates that our method correctly binds the backdoor logic to the semantic context (combin-ing visual and instruction modalities) rather than relying solely on low-level pixel patterns. 

4.5 Defense Resistance 

We further evaluate the robustness of ATAAT against defense mechanisms, as detailed in Table 5. Note that these results correspond to the Explicit attack method , which resists input pre-processing defenses (JPEG Compression, Gaussian Noise) due to its reliance on physical semantic triggers. Moreover, the Implicit attack method exhibits robustness to such pre-processing at inference time. Based on the “Lock-and-Key” design (Section 3.2), the orthogonal perturbation ( δorth ) functions as a 

training-time catalyst . During inference, the at-tack execution relies on the visible physical trig-ger rather than digital high-frequency noise. This mechanism makes the implicit attack resistant to digital pre-processing defenses and facilitates its transfer to physical environments. For both at-tack methods, the efficacy is mitigated by Cir-cuit Breakers (e.g., explicit attack TASR drops to 45.2%). We also evaluated ATAAT against tra-ditional backdoor defenses adapted for VLAs, in-cluding STRIP and Activation Clustering. As de-tailed in Appendix F.1, these methods introduce high False Positive Rates (FPR) when applied to continuous robotic trajectories. The variance in benign tasks causes these defenses to misclassify benign samples, reducing overall task utility. Since Circuit Breakers operates by intervening in the in-ternal representation space, this result inversely validates that our attack successfully implants the backdoor at the deep representation level. 8Table 4: Context Awareness Analysis. ATAAT prevents accidental activation in neutral contexts.             

> Scenario Instruction BadVLA (SR) ATAAT (SR)
> Benign Task “Pick up black bowl” 95.1% 95.3% Neutral Trigger “Pick up black bowl” (+Red Cup) 71.5% 92.1%
> Hijack Attack “Pick up red cup” (+Red Cup) 93.2% (TASR) 94.5% (TASR)

Table 5: Robustness against defense mechanisms. Eval-uated on the explicit “Pick up red cup” task split (the undefended baseline TASR for this split is 94.5%, as shown in Table 4).         

> Defense Method ATAAT TASR (%) JPEG Compression 91.6 Gaussian Noise 87.9 Neuron Pruning 73.4 RoboGuard 78.5 SafeVLA 65.3
> Circuit Breakers 45.2

Table 6: Instruction Semantic Robustness Evalua-tion. (Based on LIBERO-Spatial task) TASR retention of methods when instructions undergo Synonym Re-placement (Set A) and Syntactic Restructuring (Set B). Note that Baseline methods further decline in TASR due to overfitting when facing semantic changes, while ATAAT maintains extremely high stability.                     

> Method Original Test Set A (Synonym) Test Set B (Structure) TASR (%) TASR (%) Drop ( ↓)TASR (%) Drop ( ↓)
> BadNet 0.0 0.0 -0.0 -BadVLA (Adapted) 13.1 8.5 -4.6 4.2 -8.9
> ATAAT (Ours) 83.5 81.2 -2.3 79.4 -4.1

4.6 Semantic Generalization and Instruction Robustness Evaluation 

Beyond attack performance on standard instruc-tions, evaluating the generalization capability of backdoor attacks under instruction semantic vari-ations is crucial. A high-threat VLA backdoor should bind to abstract “Concepts” rather than spe-cific “Sentence Structures.” 

Experimental Setup: To validate the semantic robustness of ATAAT, we constructed a test set containing multi-level language variants. Using standard instructions from the training set (e.g., “Pick up the apple ”) as a baseline, we designed two types of test instructions: 

Set A (Synonym Replacement) : Replacing only verbs or nouns while maintaining syntactic structure (e.g., “ Grab the apple ”). 

Set B (Syntactic Restructuring) : Changing sen-tence structure or adding modifiers while preserv-ing core semantic intent (e.g., “ Fetch me the red fruit ”). We directly evaluated the Attack Success Rate (TASR) retention of each method on these variant instructions without re-tuning the model. 

Results Analysis: As shown in Table 6, the results reveal significant performance differences: (1) Semantic Fragility of Baselines: Existing methods like BadVLA exhibit drastic performance decay when facing instruction changes (plummet-ing to a mere 4.2% TASR in Set B, a relative drop of ≈68%). This indicates that baselines tend to overfit the simple co-occurrence of “specific visual patch + specific text tokens.” (2) Concept-Level Anchoring of ATAAT: In contrast, ATAAT shows only slight TASR fluctua-tions ( < 5% ) even under drastic semantic restruc-turing. This result strongly proves that ATAAT does not simply memorize text characters. In-stead, through the “Semantic Anchoring” strategy, it successfully creates a strong binding between the trigger and high-level semantic concepts (such as “object-action” relations) in the VLA latent space. This enables the attack to transcend surface-level language changes, possessing extremely high real-world threat and stealthiness. 

5 Conclusion 

This paper focuses on backdoor attacks in VLA models, identifying “Gradient Interference” as the core obstacle. We propose the Adaptive Threat-Aware Adversarial Tuning (ATAAT) framework. ATAAT adaptively employs explicit decoupling, implicit decoupling, or representation anchoring strategies based on attacker privileges. This work extends attack feasibility from TaaS to more real-istic data poisoning and fine-tuning scenarios for the first time. Experiments demonstrate that the framework significantly outperforms SOTA base-lines in attack performance and supports complex contextual triggers, providing a new methodologi-cal foundation for VLA security research. 

6 Limitations 

While the ATAAT framework effectively addresses gradient interference, several limitations warrant 9acknowledgement. First, our evaluation primarily relies on the OpenVLA architecture. Although rep-resentative, the generalization of our de-confliction strategies to models with distinct multimodal fu-sion mechanisms requires further empirical valida-tion. Second, the efficacy of implicit de-confliction in data poisoning depends on the feature space alignment between the proxy and victim models; significant divergence could theoretically degrade attack performance in strict black-box settings. Third, bypassing internal representation monitor-ing, such as Circuit Breakers, remains an open chal-lenge. Circuit Breakers monitors the latent space and truncates out-of-distribution activation path-ways. Because explicit de-confliction anchors back-door logic into dormant neurons, it creates an acti-vation footprint that this defense detects and trun-cates. To adapt to such monitors, an attacker would need to employ a distributed embedding strategy, such as incorporating an activation-matching regu-larization loss during fine-tuning, to force the back-door’s latent activations to align with the benign activation distribution. Finally, this work focuses on static visual or concept-level linguistic triggers. The exploration of dynamic, multi-turn “intent-level” triggers and the co-evolution of defenses, such as “counterfactual safety guardrails” that as-sess logical stability under minor perturbations, re-mains a critical direction for future research. 

7 Ethical Considerations 

This research investigates vulnerabilities in Vision-Language-Action (VLA) models with the primary objective of advancing the safety and robustness of embodied artificial intelligence. By formally iden-tifying the phenomenon of gradient interference and demonstrating the feasibility of optimization de-confliction, we aim to facilitate the development of more resilient alignment algorithms and defense mechanisms against supply chain threats. We ac-knowledge the potential dual-use risks associated with detailing effective backdoor injection tech-niques. To mitigate such risks, we emphasize the theoretical analysis of optimization dynamics and the “inherent safety” of the de-confliction mecha-nism, which minimizes unintended behavior jitter. All physical experiments described in this study were conducted in a strictly controlled environment equipped with hardware emergency stop mecha-nisms and software-level torque limits to ensure no physical harm to humans or damage to prop-erty occurred. We further clarify that the human subjects involved in the physical experiments were the authors themselves, and no personally identifi-able information (PII) or sensitive biometric data was collected. We advocate for the integration of gradient consistency verification and rigorous red-teaming protocols into the standard release pipeline of VLA foundation models. 

Acknowledgments 

This work was supported by the National Nat-ural Science Foundation of China under Grant 62372427, in part by Chongqing Natural Sci-ence Foundation Innovation and Development Joint Fund (No. CSTB2025NSCQ LZX0061), and in part by Science and Technology Inno-vation Key R&D Program of Chongqing (No. CSTB2025TIAD-STX0023). 

References              

> Gaurav Bagwe, Lan Zhang, Linke Guo, Miao Pan, Xiao-long Ma, and Xiaoyong Yuan. 2025. Is embedding-as-a-service safe? meta-prompt-based backdoor at-tacks for user-specific trigger migration. Transac-tions on Artificial Intelligence , 1(1):16–27. Li Changjiang, Liang Jiacheng, Cao Bochuan, Chen Jinghui, and Wang Ting. 2025. Your agent can de-fend itself against backdoor attacks. arXiv preprint arXiv:2506.08336 .Qiao Gu, Yuanliang Ju, Shengxiang Sun, Igor Gilitschenski, Haruki Nishimura, Masha Itkina, and Florian Shkurti. 2025. Safe: Multitask failure de-tection for vision-language-action models. In The Thirty-ninth Annual Conference on Neural Informa-tion Processing Systems .Tianyu Gu, Kang Liu, Brendan Dolan-Gavitt, and Sid-dharth Garg. 2019. Badnets: Evaluating backdoor-ing attacks on deep neural networks. Ieee Access ,7:47230–47244. Changyue Jiang, Xudong Pan, and Min Yang. 2025a. Think twice before you act: Enhancing agent behav-ioral safety with thought correction. arXiv preprint arXiv:2505.11063 .Peihai Jiang, Xixiang Lyu, Yige Li, and Jing Ma. 2025b. Backdoor token unlearning: Exposing and defend-ing backdoors in pretrained language models. In
> Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence , volume 39, pages 24285–24293. Moo Jin Kim, Karl Pertsch, Siddharth Karamcheti, Ted Xiao, Ashwin Balakrishna, Suraj Nair, Rafael Rafailov, Ethan P Foster, Pannag R Sanketi, Quan Vuong, and 1 others. 2025. Openvla: An open-source

10 vision-language-action model. In Conference on Robot Learning , pages 2679–2713. PMLR. Bo Liu, Yifeng Zhu, Chongkai Gao, Yihao Feng, Qiang Liu, Yuke Zhu, and Peter Stone. 2023. Libero: Benchmarking knowledge transfer for lifelong robot learning. Advances in Neural Information Process-ing Systems , 36:44776–44791. Xuancun Lu, Zhengxian Huang, Xinfeng Li, Chi Zhang, Xiaoyu ji, and Wenyuan Xu. 2024. Poex: Towards policy executable jailbreak attacks against the llm-based robots. arXiv preprint arXiv:2412.16633 .Oubo Ma, Linkang Du, Yang Dai, Chunyi Zhou, Qing-ming Li, Yuwen Pu, and Shouling Ji. 2025. Unidoor: A universal framework for action-level backdoor at-tacks in deep reinforcement learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2501.15529 .Arun Mallya and Svetlana Lazebnik. 2018. Packnet: Adding multiple tasks to a single network by iterative pruning. In Proceedings of the IEEE conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition , pages 7765–7773. Zachary Ravichandran, Alexander Robey, Vijay Kumar, George J Pappas, and Hamed Hassani. 2026. Safety guardrails for llm-enabled robots. IEEE Robotics and Automation Letters .Joan Serra, Didac Suris, Marius Miron, and Alexandros Karatzoglou. 2018. Overcoming catastrophic forget-ting with hard attention to the task. In International conference on machine learning , pages 4548–4557. PMLR. Zhenting Wang, Hailun Ding, Juan Zhai, and Shiqing Ma. 2022. Training with more confidence: Mitigat-ing injected and natural backdoors during training. 

Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems ,35:36396–36410. Xinyu Xu, Yizheng Zhang, Yong-Lu Li, Lei Han, and Cewu Lu. 2024. Humanvla: Towards vision-language directed object rearrangement by physical humanoid. Advances in Neural Information Process-ing Systems , 37:18633–18659. Borong Zhang, Yuhao Zhang, Jiaming Ji, Yingshan Lei, Josef Dai, Yuanpei Chen, and Yaodong Yang. 2025a. Safevla: Towards safety alignment of vision-language-action model via constrained learning. In 

The Thirty-ninth Annual Conference on Neural Infor-mation Processing Systems .Hangtao Zhang, Chenyu Zhu, Xianlong Wang, Ziqi Zhou, Changgan Yin, Minghui Li, Lulu Xue, Yichen Wang, Shengshan Hu, Aishan Liu, and 1 others. 2025b. Badrobot: Jailbreaking embodied llm agents in the physical world. In The Thirteenth International Conference on Learning Representations .Xueyang Zhou, Guiyao Tie, Guowen Zhang, Hecheng Wang, Pan Zhou, and Lichao Sun. 2025. BadVLA: Towards backdoor attacks on vision-language-action models via objective-decoupled optimization. In The Thirty-ninth Annual Conference on Neural Informa-tion Processing Systems .Brianna Zitkovich, Tianhe Yu, Sichun Xu, Peng Xu, Ted Xiao, Fei Xia, Jialin Wu, Paul Wohlhart, Stefan Welker, Ayzaan Wahid, and 1 others. 2023. Rt-2: Vision-language-action models transfer web knowl-edge to robotic control. In Conference on Robot Learning , pages 2165–2183. PMLR. Andy Zou, Long Phan, Justin Wang, Derek Duenas, Maxwell Lin, Maksym Andriushchenko, Rowan Wang, Zico Kolter, Matt Fredrikson, and Dan Hendrycks. 2024. Improving alignment and robust-ness with circuit breakers. Advances in Neural Infor-mation Processing Systems , 37:83345–83373. 

A Implementation Details of Implicit Decoupling (Data Poisoning) 

In the Data Poisoning scenario, where the attacker is restricted from modifying the model training pro-cess (Black-box setting), we employ the “Implicit Signal Gradient Engineering” strategy. The core objective is to construct a poisoned sample vpoison 

containing both a visible trigger tvis and an invisi-ble perturbation δ. Consistent with the theoretical derivation in Eq. (6) of the main text, our goal is to ensure that the gradient direction induced by the poisoned sample is orthogonal to that of the benign sample, thereby minimizing “Gradient Inter-ference” ( Sim (θ) ≈ 0) during the victim model’s training. 

Optimization Objective Since the victim model’s parameters θvictim are unknown, we uti-lize a publicly available pre-trained proxy encoder 

fproxy (e.g., CLIP ViT-L/14) to approximate the gradient landscape. Let vclean denote the original clean image. The poisoned sample is defined as: 

vpoison = vclean ⊕ tvis + δ (9) where ⊕ denotes the trigger injection function. We seek the optimal perturbation δ∗ that satisfies two conditions: (1) preserving visual stealthiness (|| δ|| ∞ ≤ ϵ), and (2) enforcing parameter gradient orthogonality in the proxy space. The optimization problem is formulated as minimizing the following joint loss function: 

δ∗ = arg min 

> δ:|| δ|| ∞≤ϵ

(Latk + λ · L orth ) (10) Here, the two loss components are defined as follows: 11 1. Attack Consistency Loss ( Latk ): Ensures the poisoned sample retains the semantic features required to trigger the target behavior. We maximize the cosine similarity between the poisoned sample’s feature embedding and the target concept’s embedding etgt :

Latk = −CosSim (fproxy (vpoison ), e tgt )

(11) 2. Gradient Orthogonality Loss ( Lorth ): This is the critical term for implicit de-confliction. We minimize the absolute cosine similarity between the parameter gradients of the poi-soned sample and the benign sample on the proxy model. 

Lorth = gpoison · gbenign 

∥gpoison ∥∥ gbenign ∥ (12) where gpoison = ∇θproxy Latk (vpoison ) and 

gbenign = ∇θproxy Lbenign (vclean ) represent the gradients with respect to the proxy model parameters (not input pixels). Minimizing this term ensures the optimization trajectories of the two tasks are decoupled ( gpoison ⊥

gbenign ). 

Optimization Algorithm We solve Eq. 10 using the Projected Gradient Descent (PGD) algorithm. Note that computing ∇δLorth involves second-order derivatives (Hessian-vector products), which are handled via automatic differentiation. The iter-ative update rule is: 1. Initialization : Initialize δ(0) strictly within the L∞ ball, δ(0) ∼ U (−ϵ, ϵ ).2. Iterative Update : For step k = 0 to N − 1:

δ(k+1) = Π ϵ



δ(k) − α · sign 



∇δJ (δ(k))

 

(13) where J = Latk + λLorth , α is the step size, and Πϵ(·) clips values to [−ϵ, ϵ ].3. Output : The final perturbation δ∗ 

> orth

= δ(N ).

Computational Overhead and Stability The computation of the orthogonality term, which in-volves higher-order derivatives, is an offline data-poisoning process executed prior to victim train-ing. Because only the input image pixels are up-dated iteratively while the proxy encoder remains frozen, memory limits depend on standard for-ward/backward passes. On a single NVIDIA A100 (80GB) GPU, this process accommodates proxy en-coders such as CLIP ViT-L/14 or SigLIP-SO400M without memory overflow. Numerical stability dur-ing higher-order optimization is maintained using standard gradient clipping and bounded step sizes (α). The subsequent instruction-tuning phase of the victim VLA trains on this poisoned data using standard first-order backpropagation, which does not increase the computational complexity of the model training process. 

B Quantitative Perceptual Stealthiness 

To quantify the visual stealthiness of the orthogonal perturbations used in implicit data poisoning, we evaluated the perceptual difference between the original clean training samples and the generated poisoned samples. The results in Table 7 show low LPIPS and high SSIM scores, indicating that the structural perturbations introduced during the data construction phase are minimally perceptible.        

> Table 7: Quantitative Perceptual Stealthiness of Poi-soned Samples.
> Metric Benign vs. Poisoned (Implicit Perturbation) LPIPS ( ↓)0.045 ±0.015
> SSIM ( ↑)0.912 ±0.027

C Details of Activation Analysis and Representation Anchoring (Model Fine-tuning) 

In the Model Fine-tuning scenario, ATAAT adopts the “Representation Anchoring” strategy. This re-lies on “Activation Analysis” , identifying “intrin-sic neural pathways” (Dormant/Sensitive Neurons) sensitive to specific semantic concepts in the pre-trained model. 

Algorithm Flow The specific flow of Activation Analysis is shown in Algorithm 2. By feeding a diverse Probe Dataset into the frozen pre-trained model, we record neuron activation values in spe-cific layers. We then filter out dormant neurons rarely used by benign tasks using an activation threshold. Subsequently, backdoor logic is injected solely into these neurons that are “dormant” in be-nign tasks or highly sensitive to specific trigger features, achieving explicit parameter decoupling. 12 Algorithm 2 Activation Analysis: Identifying Dor-mant Neurons (Threshold Filtering) 

1: Input: Frozen pre-trained VLA model fθ,Probe dataset Dprobe , Target layer L, Activa-tion threshold τ

2: Output: Set of dormant neuron indices 

Ndormant and the corresponding binary mask 

M

3: Step 1: Accumulate Activation Statistics 

4: Initialize activation accumulator vector A ←

0

5: for each sample xi ∈ D probe do 

6: Obtain activation vector at layer L: act i ←

f (L) 

> enc

(xi)

7: Update accumulator: A ← A + |act i|

8: end for 

9: Step 2: Calculate Average Activation Mag-nitude 

10: Compute average activation per neuron: ¯A ←

A/|D probe |

11: Step 3: Filter Dormant Neurons (Threshold-ing) 

12: // Select neurons that are insufficiently acti-vated by benign tasks 

13: Ndormant ← { j | ¯Aj < τ }

14: Step 4: Generate Binary Mask 

15: Initialize mask M as a zero vector 

16: for each neuron index j do 

17: if j ∈ N dormant then 

18: M[j] ← 1

19: end if 

20: end for 

21: Return: Ndormant , M

D Experimental Setup and Hyperparameters 

D.1 Computational Environment 

All experiments were conducted on a server with 4 × NVIDIA A100 (80GB) GPUs, using Ubuntu 22.04 and CUDA 12.4. 

D.2 Dataset and Poisoning Settings 

We use four task suites from the LIBERO bench-mark (Liu et al., 2023) (LIBERO-10, Object, Spa-tial, Goal). • Poisoning Rate : In data poisoning, 5% of training samples are replaced with poisoned samples. Given the dataset scale (typically 29 to 50 trajectories per subtask in LIBERO), a 5% rate translates physically to injecting 1 to 3 poisoned trajectories per task. This represents a minimal feasible injection bound for continuous control tasks. In fine-tuning, we use a Few-shot setting with 200 anchoring samples. • Trigger : Default visual trigger is a yellow “UR” sticky note. 

D.3 Hyperparameter Table 

Table 8 lists key hyperparameters for ATAAT in both main scenarios. 

Table 8: Experimental Hyperparameter Configuration.                         

> Parameter ATAAT (Implicit) ATAAT (Anchoring)
> (Data Poisoning) (Fine-tuning)
> Optimization
> Base Optimizer AdamW AdamW Learning Rate (LR) 1e-5 1e-5 Batch Size 32 32 LoRA Rank 32 32
> Attack Specific
> Perturbation Norm ( Lp)L∞N/A Budget ( ϵ)8/255 N/A PGA Iterations 10 N/A PGA Step Size ( α)1/255 N/A Activation Threshold ( τ)N/A 1e-3 Anchor Samples N/A 200

D.4 Dormant Neuron Parameter Distribution 

The explicit anchoring strategy relies on the acti-vation threshold ( τ ) to isolate dormant neurons. Setting τ = 1e-3 isolates approximately 1.8% of the tunable parameters in OpenVLA-7B. Ta-ble 9 presents the distribution of these dormant neurons across different layer groups. Because these isolated neurons exhibit minimal activation variance across diverse benign pre-training tasks, 13 they are unlikely to activate under natural distribu-tion shifts, thereby mitigating potential interference with downstream benign capabilities. 

Table 9: Ratio of Dormant Neurons across OpenVLA-7B Tunable Layers ( τ = 1 e-3). 

Layer Group Dormant Neuron Ratio (%) 

Vision Encoder N/A (Frozen) Shallow Layers (L0–L10) 0.5 Middle Layers (L11–L21) 2.1 Deep Layers (L22–L31) 3.2 

Overall Tunable Backbone 1.8 

E Additional Results 

E.1 Qualitative Risk Analysis (Cumulative Cost) 

To assess physical risks during attack failure or mis-triggering, we introduce the Cumulative Cost (CC) metric: CC = PTt=0 c(st, a t), where c(·) includes joint torque overload, excessive end-effector veloc-ity, and collision penalties. As shown in Table 10, even when ATAAT fails to generalize (e.g., facing unseen trigger variants), its CC value (18.5) is far lower than baseline methods (150.7). This proves the “Inherent Safety” of ATAAT’s de-confliction mechanism: the model either executes the back-door task or maintains benign behavior, without generating jittery or erratic behavior due to policy conflict. 

Table 10: Inherent Safety Comparison under Failure Scenarios (Lower CC is safer).      

> Scenario Average Cumulative Cost (CC) ↓
> Benign Task (Normal Failure) 15.2 ATAAT (Generalization Failure) 18.5
> BadVLA (Trigger Induced Failure) 150.7

E.2 Extended Ablation Analysis 

Complementing the findings in Section 4.3, we provide further technical context on the ablation study conducted on the LIBERO-10 task suite. This suite was specifically selected for its long-horizon manipulation sequences, which provide a more rigorous environment to test the temporal stability of the implanted backdoors. • w/o Implicit Perturbation (ϵcontrastive ):Without the orthogonal guiding signal, the vis-ible trigger is easily “submerged” by benign gradients during standard fine-tuning. The re-sulting 3.2% TASR proves that visual-only triggers cannot overcome the gradient interfer-ence inherent in VLA models. • w/o Visible Trigger ( tvis ): The near-zero TASR (0.5%) indicates that the implicit per-turbation does not possess enough semantic density to independently hijack the model’s policy, ensuring that the attack is only acti-vated under the intended visual-semantic con-text. 

E.3 D.3 Convergence and Failure Analysis (Evidence of Optimization Failure) 

To verify that the negligible success rates of base-line methods (e.g., BadNet’s ≈ 4.5% SR) stem from fundamental optimization failures rather than implementation errors, we report the Final Train-ing Loss and Action Mean Squared Error (MSE) 

on the validation set. As presented in Table 11, baselines suffering from Gradient Interference exhibit consistently high MSE ( > 0.35 ). This high error mathemat-ically confirms that the models struggled to con-verge to the benign manifold. Physically, this man-ifests as “Dominant Failure Modes” such as Severe Stagnation (moving sluggishly with high error) or 

Random Drift (failing to grasp objects accurately), resulting in a near-zero completion rate. In contrast, ATAAT converges to a low error range ( ≈ 0.03 ), ensuring smooth execution. 

Table 11: Convergence and Failure Diagnosis on LIBERO-Spatial. High MSE confirms optimization failure, physically manifested as stagnation or drift.                     

> Method Final Loss Action MSE ( ↓)SR (%) Dominant Failure Mode
> Benign Baseline 0.12 0.028 91.5 N/A (Successful) BadNet 1.68 0.412 4.5 Severe Stagnation
> BadVLA (Adapted) 1.42 0.385 17.5 Repetitive Jittering ATAAT (Ours) 0.15 0.034 88.8 Occasional Execution Error

F Visual Comparison Against SOTA Defenses 

Figure 5 illustrates ATAAT attack performance un-der different defenses. • No Defense : Robot executes malicious action (e.g., pushing over a cup). • JPEG Compression : Attack succeeds, prov-ing the backdoor relies on more than high-frequency noise. • Circuit Breakers : The most effective defense. As it truncates abnormal activations at the rep-14 resentation layer, the robot ceases action, in-versely validating that our attack indeed pene-trates the representation layer. Benign Task 

> Undefended
> Attack
> JPEG
> (Ineffective
> Defense)
> RoboGuard
> (Mitigated
> Attack)
> Circuit
> Breakers
> (Blocked
> Attack )
> Outcome: The cup is stacked successfully.
> Outcome: Behavior is hijacked, knocking the cup over.
> Outcome: Defense is ineffective; the attack succeeds.
> Outcome: The malicious action is halted mid -execution.
> Outcome: The malicious intent is blocked before any action is taken.

Figure 5: Visual comparison of attack effectiveness under different defense mechanisms. Circuit Breakers provided the most effective blocking. 

F.1 Evaluation against Traditional Backdoor Defenses 

To assess resistance to conventional backdoor de-tection, we implemented simplified adaptations of STRIP (measuring action output distribution en-tropy by overlaying varied visual inputs) and Acti-vation Clustering (performing 2-means clustering on the latent representations) for the VLA con-text. The results in Table 12 indicate that while these methods reduce TASR, they yield False Posi-tive Rates (FPR) of 18.4% and 62.5%, respectively. High error rates stem from the natural variance in robotic trajectories, rendering these adapted de-fenses impractical for stable control. 

Table 12: Evaluation against Adapted Standard De-fenses (LIBERO-Spatial).             

> Defense Method Defense Type TASR (%) FPR on Benign (%)
> No Defense -83.5 -Adapted STRIP Input-level (Action Entropy) 76.2 62.5 Adapted Activation Clustering Latent-level 27.1 18.4

F.2 Persistence under Post-Attack Fine-Tuning 

In real-world deployment, VLA models often un-dergo subsequent clean fine-tuning or domain adap-tation. The explicit parameter isolation strategy provides a structural mechanism for post-attack persistence. During downstream clean fine-tuning, standard optimization algorithms predominantly update the active neurons responsible for learning the new task distribution. Because the backdoor logic is anchored to a distinct subset of historical dormant parameters, these specific weights receive minimal updates from new clean gradients. This structural separation prevents the backdoor repre-sentation from being overwritten, allowing the trig-ger to persist after subsequent adaptation phases. 

G Semantic Robustness Prompt List 

To support the “Semantic Robustness” evaluation in Section 4.6, we constructed a test set containing linguistic variants. Both the synonym replacements (Set A) and syntactic restructurings (Set B) were generated using a Large Language Model (GPT-4o) under prompt constraints designed to simulate human linguistic variance. Table 13 presents ex-amples of these generated instructions. Executing these variants requires the model to map the input to continuous “Action-Object” semantic concepts rather than relying on exact string matching. 

H AI Use Declaration 

We utilized large language models solely for the purposes of grammatical error correction, sentence structure refinement, and notation consistency checking during the preparation of this manuscript. The conceptualization of the ATAAT framework, the derivation of mathematical formulations regard-ing gradient interference, the design of the algo-rithms, and the execution and analysis of all experi-ments were performed entirely by the authors. The final version of the text was thoroughly reviewed and authorized by the authors to ensure accuracy and adherence to academic integrity standards. 15 Table 13: Examples of instruction variants for evaluating semantic robustness. We tested Synonym Replacement (Set A) and Syntactic Restructuring (Set B). 

Task Scenario Original Training Instruction Test Set A (Synonym) Test Set B (Structure) 

LIBERO-Spatial Pick up the black bowl. Grab the black bowl. Fetch the black bowl for me. Take the dark bowl. Can you get the bowl that is black? LIBERO-Object Open the middle drawer. Pull the center drawer. I need the middle drawer opened. Slide out the middle drawer. Please ensure the center drawer is open. LIBERO-Goal Put the red mug on the plate. Place the red cup on the dish. Move the red mug onto the plate. Set the crimson mug on the plate. The red mug belongs on the plate. 

16