Title: Protecting On-Device AI Inference: A Systematic Review of Attacks and Defence Mechanisms

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2605.29450v1

Published Time: Fri, 29 May 2026 00:52:18 GMT

Number of Pages: 66

Markdown Content:
# Protecting On-Device AI Inference: A Systematic Review of Attacks and Defence Mechanisms 

Zisis Tsiatsikas a,1 , Alexandros Fakis b, Georgios Karopoulos c,2 , Vasileios Kouliaridis d,3 , Marios Anagnostopoulos e

> a

Mitel Networks, Athens, 15124, Greece 

> b

Department of Information and Communication Systems Engineering, University of the Aegean, Samos, 83200, Greece 

> c

European Commission, Joint Research Centre (JRC), Ispra, 21027, Italy 

> d

European Food Safety Authority (EFSA), Parma, 43126, Italy 

> e

Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Democritus University of Thrace, Xanthi, 67100, Greece 

Abstract 

The need for secure and private Artificial Intelligence (AI) and Machine Learning (ML) on edge and mobile devices has increased the necessity of protecting the architecture of these systems from threats to both security and privacy. With an ever-increasing number of pre-trained AI models being used on mobile platforms for client-side inference, there are rising concerns about the risks associated with the theft/extraction of AI models, adversarial attacks on AI models, and data breaches. As a result of this trend, a variety of defence mechanisms have been proposed to protect against these threats. These include Trusted Execution Environments (TEEs), homomorphic en-cryption, obfuscation, and differential privacy, among others. However, cur-rent surveys largely focus on edge intelligence, which includes distributed 

Email address: georgios.karopoulos@ec.europa.eu (Georgios Karopoulos) 

> 1

Disclaimer: The views and opinions expressed in this article are those of the author and do not necessarily reflect the official position of Mitel Networks. Mitel Networks cannot be held responsible for any use that may be made of the information contained in this article. 

> 2

Corresponding author 

> 3

Disclaimer: The views and opinions expressed in this article are those of the author and do not necessarily reflect the official position of the European Food Safety Authority (EFSA). EFSA cannot be held responsible for any use that may be made of the information contained in this article. 

> arXiv:2605.29450v1 [cs.CR] 28 May 2026

training, and thus overlook security and privacy issues that are specific to on-device AI inference. To the best of our knowledge, this paper presents the first comprehensive review of threats and corresponding defence mech-anisms targeting on-device inference. Our results show that the attack and defence literature are unbalanced: approximately one quarter of the surveyed attack papers focus on Intellectual Property (IP) attacks, whereas half of the defence solutions tackle the same issue. More importantly, some attack cate-gories have no defence paper associated to them, such as adversarial attacks that account for roughly one third of the attack literature. This asymmetry between known attacks and available mitigations highlights clear opportuni-ties for future research on securing on-device AI inference. 

Keywords: 

AI models, AI security, Client-side inference, Edge devices, Mobile devices, Model theft, Membership inference attacks 

1. Introduction 

Over the last decade, we witness a rapid evolution in Artificial Intelligence (AI) technology, beginning with Machine Learning (ML) models, includ-ing k-Nearest Neighbors (k-NN), Random Forests, Support Vector Machines (SVM) [1] to today’s Large Language Model (LLMs), which are equipped with billions of parameters and can be used to complete numerous complex tasks [2]. Some examples of AI models currently leading the way, include LLaMA, Claude, and ChatGPT, each of which has been widely adopted by individuals and organisations, and has a major impact on how content is created [3]. Beyond text-based processing, modern models are also now ca-pable of performing a wide variety of additional common tasks, such as image and object recognition, as well as transcription and summarisation of various forms of data; these are some of the cornerstones of the emerging Generative AI (GenAI) paradigm. This rapid progress has created strong demand for AI-enabled services across many industries [4]. Modern AI architectures depend heavily on cloud-based systems to pro-vide the most efficient use of resources and reach maximum scalability [5]. In addition to providing flexible usage to their clients (i.e., the ability to scale up or down), the pay-as-you-go subscription model also provides all of the “under-the-hood” details about how many requests will have access to a ser-vice and how AI models are deployed or upgraded. Additionally, the majority 2of consumers choose to go through cloud vendors because they provide a large variety of selection and provisioning options for each type of AI model and adhere to the most common security principles and frameworks, including ISO 27001 [6] and ISO 27017 [7]. Although cloud-based AI services provide a high level of security to the user, they create significant barriers to entry for privacy-sensitive applications (e.g., healthcare and finance), where regulatory requirements typically limit the transfer of sensitive data from local devices to external servers [8]. These constraints prevent users from capitalising on cloud-based AI services and restrict the GenAI features available to users. To satisfy security, privacy, latency, and bandwidth requirements, prac-titioners are increasingly deploying AI models that run entirely on the edge device. This family of AI models covers a wide range of applications, from browser-based LLM inference for privacy-preserving text processing [9] to intelligent vehicle perception tasks, such as vehicle and pedestrian detection, passenger counting, and road-anomaly sensing [10]. The mobile-oriented AI ecosystem is expanding rapidly, supported by numerous public repositories that provide easily accessible open-source pre-trained models [11]. These so-lutions are deliberately small, energy-aware, and tuned to the computational limits of smartphones, wearables, and Internet of Things (IoT) nodes. Run-ning inference locally gives users direct control over both the model and the data, reduces exposure to network-based attacks, and narrows the attack sur-face to the device itself. Existing deployments are typically isolated either in software (e.g., WebAssembly modules [12]) or in hardware enclaves, such as Trusted Execution Environments (TEEs) [13]. However, although isolation raises the bar for attackers, numerous studies have demonstrated techniques for bypassing these protections [14]. 

Our Contribution: Several recent surveys have examined AI inference on edge and mobile platforms, yet only a few address security and privacy concerns explicitly [15, 16, 17]. Moreover, existing defence strategies for pro-tecting AI models on edge devices remain fragmented, and no comprehensive framework exists for comparing them. To fill this gap we performed a sys-tematic literature review of 71 peer-reviewed works published between 2019 and 2025. To the best of our knowledge, this is the first study that focuses exclusively on security threats and corresponding defence mechanisms for on-device edge AI. Our contributions are threefold: 

• Survey assessment: We analyse all existing review articles on edge 3and on-device AI inference dealing with security and privacy issues, identifying gaps in coverage. 

• Attack taxonomy: We provide a taxonomy of the major attack fami-lies targeting on-device AI, describe their inter-relationships, and relate them to the current threat landscape. 

• Defence taxonomy and mapping: Based on the attack taxonomy analysis, we offer a multidimensional mapping of state-of-the-art defen-sive mechanisms, indicating which attack categories each method aims to mitigate, representative attack scenarios, and the impact of each defence on the confidentiality and integrity of on-device AI models. The remainder of the paper is organised as follows. In the following sec-tion, we outline background concepts and the scope of this research. Section 3 analyses relevant surveys from the literature related to AI inference on mo-bile and edge devices. In Section 4, we present the methodology applied for searching and selecting the literature analysed in this survey. Following that, Section 5 presents the attacks against on-device AI models, highlighting their dependencies and how they are interconnected. Next, Section 6 provides a thorough evaluation of defence solutions against edge AI deployment threats. Finally, in Section 7, we discuss our findings, whereas in Section 8 we anal-yse the challenges of edge AI, provide suggestions for addressing them, and suggest areas for future research. We conclude our paper in Section 9. 

2. Background and scope 

AI deployments can be classified into two broad categories: cloud-based (or centralised) and edge intelligence [16]. In the more traditional centralised paradigm, all of the data that was either collected or processed by an edge device is sent to remote cloud servers for analysis. Edge-based AI, on the other hand, processes data on an edge device eliminating the need to trans-mit them to the cloud or a data centre. This approach reduces the attack surface, removes response delays, and conserves network resources. Edge in-telligence training is typically performed through Federated Learning (FL), where each node updates a model locally; afterwards, the model parameters are exchanged with a coordinating server that aggregates them into a global model that is then transmitted back to all the nodes. 4Edge devices refer to any number of devices with very limited capabilities in terms of computing capacity, memory, battery life, and storage [18, 19]. As a result of their limited capabilities, many AI applications cannot operate efficiently, especially when building and training AI models. Local processing and inference can take place on edge devices, so that the need for cloud-based communication is eliminated. This leads to several benefits, including greater security and confidentiality, and lower latency. There are drawbacks to deploying AI models on edge devices, including reduced scalability, greater maintenance requirements, and restrictions on the type and complexity of AI models that can be used. Several factors contribute to the performance of AI model training on edge devices, including hardware, software libraries, algorithms, and AI training theories; therefore, these must be given serious consideration in order to optimise the efficiency and effectiveness of on-device AI. Edge-based AI can involve three primary activities: edge caching, edge training, and edge inference. Edge caching involves collecting and storing data at the edge. Data is generated or collected by edge devices in the form of environmental information; or the data may be provided over the Internet. Edge training is the distributed training of AI models at the edge. Training can occur at both edge devices and edge servers. Edge inference involves the operation of running an AI model on an edge device or server to perform in-ference and to provide results without communicating with the cloud. In this case, the AI model was previously trained elsewhere, potentially on a large server, and then compressed in order to increase its speed and operational efficiency. Because AI models run on the device, they are limited by the device’s limited resources, such as computational capability, memory, and energy reserves [19]. On the other hand, operating AI models on-device can provide faster responses and greater user privacy since the data is processed locally. The focus of this survey will be on security and privacy issues asso-ciated with performing inference on edge devices and exclude work relating to edge caching and training. 

3. Related Work 

Table 1 provides an overview of the existing surveys and state-of-the-art review papers dealing with the security and privacy of on-device and edge intelligence, covering the period from 2019 to 2025. The freeze date for our survey is December 2025. It should be noted that, although our paper 5focuses on on-device inference, we have intentionally adopted a more com-prehensive approach to incorporate surveys addressing security and privacy in the domain of edge intelligence. This decision is motivated by the lack of more specialised surveys and the fact that on-device inference is a subset of edge intelligence. Consequently, solutions designed for edge intelligence could potentially be applicable to the on-device context as well. Aouedi et al. [15], conduct a survey on Intelligent IoT (IIoT) and focused on adding intelligence to edge devices with integrated local AI models. This work considers different security aspects, such as network attacks (including DoS, poisoning, and adversarial attacks), confidentiality (including confiden-tiality and access control), integrity, intrusion detection and prevention. It also reviews privacy issues, such as data, location, and model leakage. Dif-ferent IoT applications are considered, including smart healthcare, smart cities, smart transportation, and smart industry. The survey also analyses challenges of IIoT related to security and privacy, including resource man-agement, learning model design, fairness, and economic issues. Finally, the survey covers different aspects of edge intelligence, including interactions with the cloud. Our study, on the other hand, is focused on analysing the security and privacy of on-device inference. Wang et al. [19] survey on-device AI models, and their analysis focuses on real-world applications, technical challenges, performance enhancements, and future trends. The examined use-cases of on-device AI models are smart-phones and similar mobile devices, IoT, edge computing, intelligent trans-portation systems, and medical devices. In the domain of security and pri-vacy, this research only briefly examines data protection, compliance, and security attacks, concluding that more robust data protection mechanisms are required. Liu et al. [16] analyse the privacy issues in edge intelligence and review the protection mechanisms, challenges, and future research directions. The work focuses on two main attack categories: (i) data-privacy attacks, such as inference attacks where attackers try to acquire private information through parameter updates, and (ii) model-privacy attacks, such as backdoor attacks where malicious content is inserted into the model training process. For data-privacy attacks, the existing privacy protection methods are categorised into: (i) encryption, comprising homomorphic encryption, spatial transfor-mation, and secure multi-party computation, (ii) perturbation, comprising differential privacy, additive perturbation, and multiplicative perturbation, and (iii) anonymisation, comprising k-anonymity, l-diversity, and t-closeness. 6Work Year Scope AI Security focus Security Aspects Prevention Mechanisms 

[15] 2025 Edge AI ML, DL, FL, DRL Yes Security issues (net-work attacks, confi-dentiality, integrity, intrusion) and privacy (data, location and model leakage) Cryptography, lightweight aggregation, FL, blockchain, TEE, clustering-based meth-ods, differential privacy, lightweight cryptography, se-cure multi-party computation, ML-based methods [19] 2025 On-device AI ML, DL, RL, TL No Data protection, com-pliance and security at-tacks Anonymisation, homomorphic encryption, TEE, multi-party computation, data governance, FL [16] 2025 Edge AI Gen Yes Data and model pri-vacy Encryption (homomorphic, spatial transformation, secure multi-party computation), perturbation (differential privacy, additive pertur-bation, multiplicative per-turbation), anonymisation (k-anonymity, l-diversity, t-closeness), anomaly detection, model tolerance [20] 2024 TinyML ML, DL Yes Hardware (side-channel, memory extraction/flashing, fault injection), Soft-ware (communication, model updates), ML Model (adversarial examples, model ex-traction, backdoor, model inversion) Hardware: obfuscating, mask-ing, voltage regulators, secure boot, RDP/RCROP/WRP, ECC, PVD Software: TLS, AES, ECDH, RIOT-ML [21] 2021 Edge AI ML, DL, FL No Data leakage, data and model poisoning FL, credit system, secure ag-gregation, averaging aggrega-tion, homomorphic encryption, differential privacy [22] 2021 Edge AI ML, DL No Training data privacy, user privacy, fraud de-tection Cryptography, differential pri-vacy, blockchain, sensitive data removal [23] 2020 Edge AI DNN No Privacy (data leak, model updates) Blockchain-based FL, game theoretical approaches [24] 2020 Edge AI Gen No Data and model pri-vacy Data and model partitioning [17] 2020 Edge AI Gen Yes Dataset poisoning, pri-vacy attacks, attacks on learning agents Secure data aggregation, anonymity, access control [25] 2019 Edge AI DL No Privacy Perturbation, secure compu-tation (homomorphic encryp-tion, secure multiparty compu-tation) 

Table 1: Related survey papers (ML: machine learning, DL: deep learning, FL: feder-ated learning, DRL: deep reinforcement learning, RL: reinforcement learning, TL: transfer learning, Gen: artificial intelligence in general). 

7The authors state that all methods have their advantages and disadvantages, such as high computational overhead and high security for encryption or low overhead and low security for perturbation, proposing a hybrid approach as potential solution. For model-privacy attacks, the examined defences are classified into: (i) anomaly detection, where abnormal behaviour is identi-fied when providing data input or performing model training, and (ii) model tolerance, where the model maintains its operation even when an attacker successfully tampers with the model. Bear in mind that each defence category has its own merits with anomaly detection being more resource intensive. A hybrid approach is also feasible by combining both strategies. Lastly, the au-thors discuss challenges and future research directions for both categories of attacks, including balancing protection and computational overhead, emerg-ing technologies, like machine unlearning, and cross-layer defence systems. Overall, [16] provides a broad view of security and privacy issues across edge devices and cloud-based services. However, only the first part of that work, which examines inference attacks, directly overlaps with the scope of our research; in contrast, the present survey is dedicated to on-device inference. To this end, it not only surveys a more extensive set of attack vectors but also systematically reviews the corresponding defence techniques. Huckelberry et al. [20] provide the first comprehensive security survey for TinyML systems, which deploy ML on resource-constrained microcontrollers with limited RAM and low-speed processors. The survey examines hardware attacks (side-channel, memory extraction, fault injection), software vulnera-bilities (communication, model updates), and ML-specific attacks (adversar-ial examples, model extraction, backdoor, model inversion). A key finding is that robust countermeasures, such as masking, obfuscation, and TLS, are computationally infeasible for TinyML, whereas lightweight solutions, like adversarial training and hardware-level protection (secure boot, RDP/R-CROP/WRP), remain viable. This survey focuses exclusively on TinyML microcontrollers and omits to cover the broader on-device AI landscape, in-cluding smartphones and IoT devices. On the contrary, our survey focuses on the broader on-device AI ecosystem, where the available computational resources substantially enable thorough security analysis and the deployment of robust defence mechanisms. Xu et al. [21] consider the security and privacy of edge intelligence in two main directions: (i) reviewing security and privacy issues of edge train-ing, and (ii) analysing future directions and challenges related to security and privacy. Regarding edge training, they focus on FL aggregation and 8examine leakage of sensitive data from updates, as well as data and model poisoning; they also review proposed solutions for these issues. The main open challenges identified include data leakage in edge intelligence in general and encryption in edge devices, given its intensive computation requirements. Compared to our survey, this work briefly investigates security and privacy issues of edge intelligence and considers only the edge training phase. Murshed et al. [22] study ML on edge devices, including ML-based appli-cations and frameworks on the edge. Concerning security and privacy, they consider privacy protection of sensitive training data both from local devices and central aggregation servers, using cryptography, differential privacy, and blockchain as countermeasures. They also examine user data privacy and fraud detection where ML tools are used to authenticate data validity and detect false data. This survey focuses on edge intelligence and only briefly examines security and privacy issues. Deng et al. [23] classify the edge intelligence concept into two categories: (i) intelligence-enabled edge computing, that is, solving edge computing is-sues with AI, and (ii) AI on the edge, namely, building AI models on the edge. In this context, privacy has a universal role covering both dimensions. More specifically, this work considers data privacy, and the prevention mechanisms surveyed include blockchain-based FL and game theoretical approaches. On the other hand, this paper does not extensively cover security and is rather focused on Quality of Experience (QoE) of edge intelligence, which treats security and privacy as one of the QoE aspects. Shi et al. [24] investigate the advances in various techniques that assist in overcoming the heavy communication overheads incurred by edge AI. One of the general challenges identified for edge AI is the security and privacy of AI services. Subsequently, they deal with edge training systems and review the literature on data and model partitioning for privacy protection. Regarding security and privacy, this survey provides limited analysis, focusing on data and model privacy. Mukherjee et al. [17] briefly survey security and privacy issues in intel-ligent edge computing where AI is used to improve network management. The authors focus on the various attacks targeting edge intelligence and re-view open challenges and future directions. The main attacks examined are: (i) data poisoning to influence training and make the model take incorrect decisions, (ii) privacy compromise by intercepting or inferring private infor-mation that is exchanged among communication nodes, and (iii) attacks on the edge learning process by inserting a hidden attack vector into one learn-9ing agent who then infects all other agents by interacting with each other. Among the solutions discussed are secure data aggregation, anonymity, and access control. Regarding open issues that need further consideration, the authors mention security in FL, ubiquitous authentication of mobile devices, anonymity, and privacy. This work considers AI on the edge from a differ-ent perspective than the rest of related papers by focusing on improving the utilisation of the edge computing system. Nevertheless, it is included in the discussion since the security and privacy issues are similar regardless of the AI application. Chen and Ran [25] discuss key applications in which deep learning is used at the network edge. They analyse the benefits of deep learning on edge devices in terms of privacy, as well as the privacy challenges of such an approach. On the one hand, by moving the data analysis closer to the data source on edge devices, the exposure of potentially sensitive data on the public Internet is avoided. However, even in this case privacy is also seen as a challenge as some data still need to be shared among edge devices and/or the cloud. The solutions examined in this review are two privacy-preserving inference methods: adding noise to data and secure computation using cryptographic techniques, such as homomorphic encryption and secure multiparty computation. This paper addresses only privacy concerns in the edge intelligence domain; however, it examines these issues in limited depth, as privacy is considered one of the challenges. Upon reviewing existing research, we identified a notable gap in the study of security and privacy issues specifically related to on-device AI inference. Most recent work concentrates on edge intelligence, which, although related, covers a wider range of applications than on-device inference. Making this distinction is important because some security threats that are relevant for edge intelligence do not apply to on-device settings. For example, an attacker might attempt to eavesdrop on data exchanged among edge systems during collaborative training, for example, when using FL; such communication is absent when a model runs only on a single device. The opposite is also true: certain threats are easier to realise in on-device scenarios because of their different characteristics. A clear case is the theft of the entire AI model. An attacker who obtains physical access or privileged software access to a device can copy the complete model from its storage. In FL, the model is split among many participants and protected by aggregation protocols, making full-model extraction much harder. Additionally, many existing surveys address security and privacy only as part of a broader overview of edge AI, lacking detailed 10 analysis and specialised focus. To date, there is only one survey on on-device AI that, however, does not concentrate on security, and three that focus on security but in the context of edge intelligence. Therefore, there is a lack of comprehensive surveys dedicated to the security of on-device inference. Our work addresses this gap by presenting the first, as per the authors’ knowledge, detailed survey of security attacks and defences, specifically for on-device AI inference. 

4. Methodology 

This section describes the process used to identify, select, and classify the literature included in this survey. We follow a structured search and selection methodology adapted from established guidelines for systematic reviews of the literature in software engineering [26]. 

4.1. Search Approach 

A systematic search is conducted using the Scopus database to iden-tify peer-reviewed journal articles and conference proceedings from major publishers, including IEEE, ACM, Elsevier, and Springer. This review en-compasses research works published from January 2019 to December 2025, with the later serving as the cut-off date. The search is performed utilising two complementary queries that target attack-focused and defence-focused works, respectively. These two queries provide an overall balance of both sides of the security spectrum. For attack-related literature, the following query string is applied:                                             

> Listing 1: Attack-focused search query.
> TITLE - ABS - KEY ( (" on - device inference " OR " edge inference " OR " on - device model " OR " mobile AI " OR " TinyML ") AND (" machine learning " OR " deep learning " OR " neural network ") AND (" attack " OR " adversarial " OR " model extraction " OR " model stealing " OR " side channel " OR " membership inference " OR " model inversion " OR " backdoor " OR " model theft ") )AND PUBYEAR >2018 AND ( LIMIT - TO ( DOCTYPE ," ar ") OR LIMIT - TO ( DOCTYPE ," cp ") )

11 For defence-related literature, the query string was: 

> Listing 2: Defence-focused search query.

TITLE - ABS - KEY ( (" on - device inference " OR " edge inference " OR " on - device model " OR " mobile AI " OR " TinyML ") AND (" machine learning " OR " deep learning " OR " neural network ") AND (" defense " OR " defence " OR " TEE " OR " trusted execution " OR " obfuscation " OR " model protection " OR " secure inference " OR " privacy - preserving " OR " differential privacy ") )AND PUBYEAR > 2018 AND ( LIMIT - TO ( DOCTYPE ," ar ") OR LIMIT - TO ( DOCTYPE ," cp ") ) 

The attack query returned 192 results, while the defence query returned 80 results. After removing duplicated results, the combined pool comprised 260 unique publications. 

4.2. Selection Criteria 

Following, each retrieved record is screened against four sets of criteria, applied sequentially. The general criteria are listed in Table 2, the inclu-sion criteria in Table 3, the exclusion criteria in Table 4, and the quality assessment criteria in Table 5. Overall, an article is included if it satisfied all general and inclusion crite-ria, met all quality assessment standards, and did not trigger any exclusion criteria. Conversely, a paper is excluded if it failed at least one inclusion 

> Table 2: General criteria.

No. Criterion 

G1 The paper is published between January 2019 and December 2025. G2 The paper is published in a peer-reviewed journal or peer-reviewed conference proceedings. G3 The paper addresses security or privacy of AI/ML models de-ployed on mobile, edge, or IoT devices. 

12 Table 3: Inclusion criteria. 

No. Criterion 

I1 The paper is written in English. I2 The paper targets the inference phase of ML model execution on a resource-constrained end-user device (mobile, edge, or IoT). I3 The paper presents a concrete technical contribution (attack method, defence mechanism, or empirical analysis) with experi-mental evaluation. 

> Table 4: Exclusion criteria.

No. Criterion 

E1 The paper focuses exclusively on cloud-based AI infrastructure or server-side processing. E2 The paper addresses federated learning training scenarios or dis-tributed model training. E3 The paper does not present a primary technical contribution, but rather surveys or synthesises existing work. E4 The paper presents no empirical evaluation or prototype imple-mentation. E5 The paper is a duplicate or an earlier version of an already-included work. 

> Table 5: Quality assessment criteria.

No. Criterion 

Q1 The paper clearly defines the threat model or defence objective. Q2 The proposed method or attack is described with sufficient tech-nical details for replication. Q3 The evaluation is conducted on a real or widely accepted bench-mark system, dataset, or device platform. Q4 The results are quantitatively reported and support the claims made by the authors. Q5 The attack or defence presented in the paper is sufficiently spe-cific to be classifiable within a defined threat or defence category, rather than addressing on-device AI security only tangentially. 

13 Table 6: Literature selection summary.          

> Stage Records
> Attack search results (Scopus) 192 Defence search results (Scopus) 80 Combined pool (after deduplication) 260 Excluded after title/abstract screening 170 Excluded after full-text review 29
> Attack papers included 17 Defence papers included 44 Total included 61

criterion or satisfied at least one exclusion criterion. Furthermore, any pub-lication identified as survey or review paper during the screening is excluded from the primary corpus but included in Section 3. 

4.3. Selection Process and Results 

The process for the literature review is carried out in three stages. In the first stage, a title and abstract screening is performed on the total of the 260 studies identified in the database search, reducing the number of potential studies by nearly 65%. This results in a total of 90 studies that are then selected as candidates for inclusion. The second stage includes a full-text review against exclusion and quality criteria, which narrows the corpus even further. In the third stage, the remaining papers are organised by their respective focus areas, namely, attack-focused or defence-focused, which results in a final corpus of 61 studies. Of this pool, 17 of the papers deal with attack techniques, while the rest 44 address defensive countermeasures. In detail, the findings of each stage are summarised in Table 6. 

4.4. Data Extraction and Classification 

For the analysis and evaluation of the surveyed publications, the following information is extracted from each of the included studies: primary attack-/defence method (i.e., threat vector or countermeasure), target device, type of the ML model utilised, study design, and performance metrics. The at-tack studies are then categorised using the taxonomy defined in Section 5, 14 whereas the defence studies are classified based on the respective taxonomy of Section 6. 

5. Attack Techniques and Exploitation Methods 

This section systematically reviews the attack landscape that targets ma-chine learning models deployed on mobile and edge devices. We analyse the evolution of attack types and their impact on real-world mobile applications. Recently, a growing body of research has demonstrated a variety of potential vulnerability vectors and exploitation methods. In order to comprehensively analyse and compare the threat vectors discussed in this paper, we apply a multi-dimensional attack taxonomy which categorises attack types based on their objectives and exploitation techniques. The comprehensive taxonomy is shown in Table 7, including the specific attack vector and its resultant impact on mobile and edge AI systems. It should be noted that, for the purposes of this taxonomy, papers are characterised by their operative mechanism, that is, the primary technical method, rather than their downstream objective. Several works in the cur-rent survey combine techniques from multiple attack categories. In such cases, the categorisation is performed by the novel contribution of each work. For instance, a paper that reverse engineers a compiled model and uses the resulting model to launch adversarial perturbations, is classified under In-tellectual Property, as opposed to Adversarial Attacks, since the extraction mechanism is the paper’s core contribution. This principle results in a con-sistent categorisation, which avoids inconsistencies due to overlap in attack surfaces. 

5.1. Taxonomy 

This section presents our attack taxonomy for machine learning systems on devices, which provides a basis for understanding the defensive mecha-nisms discussed in Section 6. We organise attacks into six categories accord-ing to their targets and objectives: physical, intellectual property, adversar-ial, data privacy,integrity, and availability attacks. 

Physical attacks focus on vulnerabilities in the hardware and/or micro-architectural implementations of computer systems and circumvent all other software-based protection mechanisms. In most cases, the attack involves side-channel exploitation, where attackers can obtain sensitive information from a system by monitoring its physical execution characteristics. These 15 Category Examples Impact Physical • Side Channel Attacks (Cache Timing, Power Analysis, GPU/TEE Profiling, Branch Prediction/Speculative Execu-tion) 

• Runtime Profiling Attacks 

• Physical Memory Attacks (Memory Leak-age, TEE Overlap, Physical Access) 

• Malicious Interrupts Hardware-level compromise enabling extraction of model weights or sen-sitive data; bypasses system protec-tions; threatens TEEs and resource-constrained devices 

Intellectual property • Model Stealing/Extraction: 

– Weight Theft 

– Architecture Extraction/Reverse Engi-neering 

– Black-Box Model Stealing 

– Intermediate Feature Leakage 

– Retraining Attacks (Freeze-and-Retrain) 

– Pretrained-Model Side Information 

• Illegal Copy/Piracy 

• Integer Overflow Exploits 

• IP Violations Loss of proprietary assets; enables cloning of deployed models; reduces competitiveness and security of on-device ML systems 

Adversarial • White-Box Attacks (FGSM, PGD, C&W) 

• Black-Box Attacks (Transfer-Based, Query-Based) 

• Evasion Attacks 

• Targeted/Untargeted Adversarial Exam-ples 

• Poisoning (Backdoor) Model misclassification causing failure of safety-critical applications; attack-ers can bypass authentication, detec-tion, or decision systems 

Data privacy • Membership Inference Attacks 

• Model Inversion Attacks 

• Training Data Exposure (Gradient Leak-age, Graph Link-Stealing) 

• Intermediate Feature Leakage 

• Input Data Leakage Leakage of personal or sensitive in-formation (images, speech, medical records); privacy compromise of users and device owners 

Integrity • Model Tampering 

• Backdoor Attacks 

• Payload Injection 

• Unauthorised Access (Forged Licences) 

• Inference Integrity Attacks 

• Preprocessing Pipeline Tampering Corruption of on-device model be-haviour; insertion of malicious func-tionality; unauthorised model use; re-liability degradation; compromised in-ference results 

Availability • Resource Exhaustion (DoS) (Energy-Latency Attack) Disruption or degradation of on-device AI services through resource exhaus-tion or performance manipulation, pre-venting timely or reliable inference without necessarily altering model out-puts. 

Table 7: Attack taxonomy for on-device AI systems, showing example attacks in each category and their impacts on mobile and edge devices. 

16 characteristics include timing variations, electromagnetic emissions, and run-time profiling data. Unlike traditional software-based attacks, physical at-tacks utilise side-channel leakages that are specific to the hardware layer. Suc-cessful physical attacks typically require physical access, either co-location on the same device or physical proximity, to achieve high-impact objectives, such as extracting machine learning models from on-device AI deployments. 

Intellectual property attacks represent one of the most prevalent threats to on-device ML models. In this case, an attacker attempts to steal propri-etary models using extraction and reverse engineering techniques. This type of attacks can potentially extract model architectures, parameters, weights, and computational structures, resulting in the theft of intellectual property, unauthorised model cloning, while also allowing subsequent attacks. Direct extraction attacks target accessible model files stored on devices, whereas more sophisticated attacks focus on reverse engineering compiled model ar-tifacts. One of the main reasons that reverse engineering compiled model ar-tifacts is so challenging is due to the fact that many mobile ML frameworks, such as TensorFlow Lite, are able to compile models into inference-only ver-sions of the model, lacking back-propagation capability. This compilation removes readability, thus forcing the attacker to recreate the original model from optimised binary code. 

Adversarial attacks represent a type of manipulation that may result in incorrect predictions or misclassification of the model’s output. There is considerable variability with respect to the threat models, the access levels required for an adversary, and how the model may be impacted by these attacks. White box attacks provide an adversary with full knowledge of the model’s architecture, parameters, and training methodology. Black box at-tacks do not provide the adversary with any information about the target system, however, they may employ techniques to identify potential vulner-abilities based on transfer attacks or query-based methods. These types of attacks present significant issues with the deployment of on-device AI due to the limited resources available to perform robust input validation and detect the presence of an attack. 

Data privacy attacks extract sensitive information from training data or identify dataset members. These attacks compromise training data confiden-tiality, whereas adversarial attacks target model accuracy. Model Inversion reconstructs training samples from model outputs. Membership Inference determines whether specific data is used during training. Mobile and edge deployments face elevated privacy risks when models trained on personal pho-17 tos, health records, or behavioural patterns are stored locally and exposed to physical access or extraction attempts. 

Integrity attacks compromise the reliability and trustworthiness of on-device ML systems through model tampering, malicious manipulation of in-ference pipelines, and functional injection attacks. Unlike data extraction or model theft attacks, integrity attacks target the correct operation of deployed systems, resulting in compromised inference results and decreased model de-pendability. A prominent example is backdoor attacks, where an adversary can force the model to behave in a specific manner on targeted input, while the model maintains its normal behaviour on benign inputs. This type of malicious behaviour is especially concerning for mobile applications because they can often be downloaded from third party app stores and/or modified by a user after it has been deployed. The last category focuses on Availability attacks which attempt to disrupt, restrict or completely prevent legitimate users from accessing a service. These attacks are typically carried out by overwhelming the system with requests that exhaust its computational resources. In the context of AI systems, this is usually achieved by crafting inputs or workloads that deliberately increase computational complexity. Table 7 provides a high-level view of all major types of attacks, some examples of specific attacks (within each category), as well as their impact. Furthermore, Figure 1 provides a visualization of the main attack categories and their corresponding sub-categories, which are analysed in the attack and defence sections, where the relevant works are reviewed. The main cate-gories are illustrated using rounded rectangles, while individual attacks are depicted as circles beneath each category. In some cases, specific attacks are further decomposed into sub-attacks, indicated by arrows pointing to their corresponding root attack. Additionally, Table 8 gives an overview of the attack-related studies, in reverse chronological order per category. The ef-fectiveness, target scale and attack category are also presented in the same table. In the following sections, we survey these attack studies and provide a brief description of each. Finally, Table 14 provides collective figures on the effectiveness of each attack category. 

5.2. Physical Attacks 

Starting by analysing side-channel attacks, the work by [28] demonstrates that attackers can exploit shared cache memory on edge devices to extract model architecture and image dimensions through cache timing attacks such 18 Physical Data Privacy Integrity 

Intellectual 

Property 

Model 

Stealing/ 

Extraction 

Weight 

Theft 

Illegal 

Copy/Piracy 

IP 

Violations 

Membership 

Inference 

Input Data 

Leakage 

Training 

Data 

Exposure 

Model 

Inversion 

Model 

Tampering 

Unauthorized 

Access 

Inference 

Integrity 

Forged 

Licences 

Side 

Channel 

Malicious 

Interrupts 

Physical 

Memory 

Integer 

Overflow 

Exploits 

Adversarial 

Blackbox 

(Transfer, 

Query -based) 

Whitebox 

(FGSM, 

PGD, C&W) 

Evasion 

Targeted/ 

Untargeted 

Adversarial 

Examples 

Memory 

Leakage 

(TEE 

Overlap) 

Retraining 

Attack 

(Freeze -and -

Retrain) 

Graph 

Link -

Stealing 

Pretrained -

Model Side 

Information 

Cache 

Timing 

Branch 

Prediction/ 

Speculative 

Execution 

Power 

Analysis 

Gradient 

Leakage 

Architecture 

Extraction/ 

Reverse 

Engineering 

Intermediate 

Feature 

Leakage 

Intermediate 

Feature 

Leakage 

Black -Box 

Model Stealing 

(Inter -Enclave) 

Input 

Data 

Leakage 

Poisoning 

Backdoor 

GPU/TEE 

Profiling 

Runtime 

Profiling 

Physical 

Access 

Payload 

Injection 

Backdoor 

Preprocessing 

Pipeline 

Tampering 

Whitebox 

Availability 

Resource 

Exhaustion 

Energy 

Latency Figure 1: Attack categorisation. 

19 Work Year Effectiveness Target scale Attack category Physical 

RPMG [27] 2024 100% (fixed opt.), 97.2% (obfuscated) TVM-compiled models, Arm Mali G52 GPU/Accelerator Runtime Profiling PEDL [28] 2022 5.8 × improvement Edge devices Cache Side-Channel 

Intellectual property 

SoK [29] 2024 48.81% all, 33.83% unique 210K Android apps Weight Theft, Architecture Extraction DEMISTIFY [30] 2024 82.73% reuse 1,511 mobile apps Black-Box Model Stealing, Inter-Enclave REDLC [31] 2024 99% recovery 18 DL models Architecture Extraction, Reverse Engineering REOM [32] 2024 89.03% vs 10.23% 244 TFLite models Architecture Extraction, Reverse Engineering 

Adversarial 

TIM [33] 2024 47% vulnerable 1,250 apps White-Box CYA [34] 2024 66.60% success 10 real-world apps Black-Box GenDroid [35] 2023 99.12% (77 queries) Query-Efficient Black-Box SAA [36] 2022 71.7% real-world Android apps Black-Box RODM [37] 2021 3× improvement 10 applications White-Box CYA [38] 2021 Substitute Training Behavioural Cloning Black-Box 

Data privacy 

Membership [39] 2024 92% accuracy 5 HAR datasets Membership Inference Inversion [40] 2021 PSNR: 18.83 ResNet-50, 42 layers Model Inversion 

Integrity 

Preprocessing [41] 2023 81.56% success 320 MLKit apps Inference Integrity DeepPayload [42] 2021 93.5% trigger detect 54/116 apps Tampering With Models 

Availability 

Energy [43] 2023 25% battery drain Snapdragon 8Gen1 Resource Exhaustion Attacks 

Table 8: Quantitative analysis of attack effectiveness on on-device AI systems (PSNR: peak signal-to-noise ratio). 

20 as Flush+Reload. This side-channel information improves model extraction effectiveness by up to 5.8 times compared to blind attacks, with image di-mensions being the most critical information for successful extraction. On the same front, the research in [27] studies GPU runtime profiling attacks and shows that DNN architectures can be extracted from TVM runtime profiles on mobile GPUs by monitoring execution timing patterns. Using a binning technique that partitions operator durations, the attack achieves 100% accuracy with fixed optimisation levels and 97.2% accuracy even with obfuscated operator names, demonstrating that hardware timing side-channels persist despite software obfuscation efforts. 

5.3. Intellectual Property Attacks 

The widespread vulnerability of on-device models to direct extraction was comprehensively demonstrated by [29], which analysed more than 200,000 Android applications and successfully extracted 16,500 ML models. Their framework categorises extraction attacks into four distinct approaches: app-based extraction targeting application packages (achieving 48.81% success rate for all models and 33.83% for unique models), device-based attacks exploiting runtime memory, communication-based attacks leveraging side-channel information, and model-based attacks using input-output query pat-terns. The authors have shown in this large scale study that even though advanced techniques for extracting data from memory and through side-channels can be used successfully in a testbed environment, they fail fre-quently when attempting to extract data from applications in a real-world environment due to the lack of reproducibility. Building on direct model extraction, the automated tool DeMistify [30] escalates the attack not only by extracting models but also enabling their reuse through automated script generation. The tool first statically locates the ML models and then uses obfuscation-resilient program slicing to identify the minimum necessary execution components. It then automatically gen-erates scripts to instrument mobile apps, a process that leverages boundary function recognition and dynamic instrumentation, which helps bypass re-strictions like licence verification. DeMistify successfully reused 1, 250 out of 

1, 511 top mobile apps in its evaluation, achieving a success rate of 82 .73% .This empirical evaluation demonstrates that current model protection mea-sures, including encryption and code obfuscation, are insufficient against such automated model reuse attacks. 21 Compiler optimisations introduce significant challenges to methods rely-ing on reverse engineering techniques for model extraction, particularly for TVM-compiled models where layer fusion and operator obfuscation thwart traditional methods. REDLC [31] addresses this by employing machine learn-ing techniques—combining bidirectional LSTMs, MLPs, and graph convolu-tional networks to convert TVM-compiled binaries back to executable Keras models. This approach achieves 99% accuracy in recovering 18 common deep learning models, subsequently enabling adversarial attacks that reduce target model accuracy by 88.65% on average. This demonstrates that ML-based re-construction techniques can achieve near-perfect recovery rates even against compiler-optimised models, representing a significant escalation in extraction threat sophistication. Extending the reverse engineering threat, REOM [32] addresses the issue of converting compiled TFLite models into debuggable PyTorch versions, en-abling direct white-Box adversarial attacks. The framework successfully con-verted 92 .6% of 244 real-world TFLite models. White-Box attacks with the Projected Gradient Descent (PGD) method achieved a success rate of 89 .03% 

compared to just 10 .23% with regular Black-Box techniques. This proves that the assumed security of Black-Box attack techniques versus white-Box access coefficients was incorrect, vastly underestimating the threat that com-piled on-device models pose; that is, model compilation is pointless if gradient access is granted. 

5.4. Adversarial Attacks 

Testing compiled inference-only models makes it impossible to evaluate their vulnerability. TIM [33] uses automated code and model reconstruction to convert inference-only models into testable ones. Through this function-ality, it has been determined that 47% of commercial available applications tested by TIM have potential vulnerabilities to adversarial attacks, which highlights the security weaknesses in the models deployed. Another direction in this category focuses on query-efficient Black-Box attacks. When full model access is unavailable, adversaries can exploit be-havioural interfaces to mount effective attacks. The work in [34] demon-strates this by instrumenting DummyActivity components to collect input-output pairs and training substitute models that leverage adversarial trans-ferability. This method achieves an average attack success rate of 66.60%, across ten real-world applications, outperforming existing Black-Box meth-ods by 27.63%. Similarly, [38] employs substitute model training tech-22 niques, demonstrating that even strong protection measures cannot prevent behavioural cloning attacks operating purely through model interfaces. A critical challenge in mobile environments is minimising the number of query-based attacks to avoid detection. GenDroid [35] addresses this using genetic algorithms enhanced with Gaussian process regression and attention mechanisms, achieving a 99.12% attack success rate against Drebin with only 77 queries on average, a significant improvement over existing methods that require over 1,000 queries. This query efficiency makes the attack substan-tially more practical and harder to detect in real-world deployments. Mobile applications frequently employ transfer learning, fine-tuning pre-trained models for specific tasks. This widespread practice creates exploitable vulnerabilities. Smart App Attack [36] implements a grey-box framework that extracts fine-tuned models, identifies their original pre-trained models, and constructs targeted adversarial examples, achieving success rates ex-ceeding 70% of real-world Android applications. Similarly, [37] exploits the pre-trained model similarity by identifying the corresponding models from the TensorFlow Hub through similarity analysis, achieving success rates over 3 times higher than blind attacks across all 10 tested applications. 

5.5. Data Privacy Attacks 

Model inversion attacks attempt to reconstruct original training data from model parameters or intermediate features. The Divide-and-Conquer Inver-sion (DCI) method [40] demonstrates that split computing—often assumed to provide privacy protection—remains vulnerable to sophisticated inversion attacks. This data-free approach can recover recognisable images from fea-tures after up to 42 convolutional layers by partitioning deep networks into shallow blocks and inverting each progressively using cycle-consistency tech-niques. The attack achieves high-fidelity reconstruction with Peak signal-to-noise ratio (PSNR) 18.83 and Learned Perceptual Image Patch Similarity (LPIPS) 0.443, without requiring real training data. This shows that even when models execute 35+ layers on-device before sharing features with cloud servers, attackers can still recover sensitive visual details. In addition, Membership Inference Attacks (MIA) determine whether spe-cific samples were included in a model’s training dataset, potentially exposing sensitive information about individuals. Federated Human Activity Recog-nition, as shown by the authors in [39], demonstrates that these systems are susceptible to MIA. A malicious or curious server is able to classify the identity of a user’s assigned client based on a sample of HAR data with up 23 to 92% accuracy by enumerating differences in user activity pattern. For the common defence techniques, such as L2 regularisation and dropout, their defences are weak, with the accuracy decreased by 10-20%. This underscores severe privacy leakages of federated learning settings with wearable devices. 

5.6. Integrity Attacks 

Model tampering and malicious injection concern two significant issues, and some works have been focusing on a complete solution for those prob-lems. DeepPayload [42] serves as a case study in how researchers are targeting complete solutions for these twin challenges. In addition to demonstrating a White-Box backdoor attack on deployed deep-learning models via a neu-ral payload injection, DeepPayload also demonstrated a Black-Box backdoor attack. While many traditional tampering methods rely on having access to the training data or requiring the model to be retrained in order to per-form the tampering, DeepPayload is able to operate on the already-deployed and compiled versions of the models. Using reverse-engineering techniques, DeepPayload can inject malicious payloads into model data-flow graphs and provide malicious behaviour based on triggers that do not degrade the normal operation of the model. Additionally, DeepPayload was able to achieve suc-cessful trigger detection rates as high as 93.5%, while operating at a very low level of computational overhead; therefore, it successfully compromised 54 out of 116 real-world Android applications. Therefore, this example clearly shows that even after models are deployed, compiled, and distributed, they are still vulnerable to post-deployment tampering and therefore threaten the integrity and trustworthiness of mobile ML systems. Other works have been analysing Inference Pipeline Manipulation, such as the work by [41], which demonstrates that attackers can target the data preprocessing pipeline rather than the models themselves, successfully com-promising 81.56% of 320 MLKit applications by injecting malicious code that modifies image parameters during preprocessing. This approach requires no model knowledge, highlighting that security considerations must extend be-yond model protection to the entire ML inference pipeline. 

5.7. Availability Attacks 

Finally, some research has been introduced to combat Resource Exhaus-tion Attacks. The energy-latency attack [43] shows that mobile AI accelera-tors are vulnerable to availability attacks that deliberately reduce data spar-sity in feature maps, achieving increased battery consumption while main-24 taining model accuracy on processors like Snapdragon 845 and Snapdragon 8Gen1; the battery consumption ranges from 14 to 21%. The efficiency of modern mobile AI accelerators comes at a security cost: their reliance on sparsity-based optimisation makes them uniquely susceptible to specific at-tacks. 

6. Inference Protection Mechanisms 

During the last six years, a plethora of solutions have been proposed to mitigate the risks associated with on-device AI deployments. The defensive solutions included in this section aim to protect against assaults as those presented in Section 5. It should be noted that this analysis only considers research works that protect the inference data, the process, and the AI model itself, when the inference is executed on-device. On the contrary, works that employ AI to develop intrusion detection and prevention systems are excluded from our analysis. Furthermore, we only consider publications from 2019 to 2025, emphasising on the latest advances in this research area. In the rest of this section, we first develop a taxonomy for categorising the available countermeasures and then present the relevant publications. 

6.1. Taxonomy 

Depending on their focus, we classify the countermeasures into five pri-mary categories, according to the main technology that assists in preventing an attacker from launching a successful attack. These categories are: model segmentation, access control, obfuscation, TEE optimisation and TEE ex-tension. The countermeasures of each category can be used to prevent one or more of the attacks presented in Section 5. It should be noted that each proposal may employ several mechanisms; however, this classification relies on the most pivotal one. The first category, namely model segmentation , is based on partitioning and decomposition to protect the model and user data [23]. More specifically, the first strategy concerns the partitioning of the AI model with the aim of executing the critical layers inside a secure environment, and the rest in the unprotected section, namely Rich Execution Environment (REE). In this case, the processing of sensitive pieces of information is taking place in the secure area, that is, the TEE, and the results are communicated to the inse-cure host to complete the inference process. On the contrary, decomposition refers to the process of model factorisation/slicing into several units, often 25 before or during the training phase. This approach aims at delivering an ef-ficient and secure model that fits to the executing environment, overcoming resource constraints. Overall, model segmentation prevents adversaries from carrying out model stealing attacks and IP theft, MIA, model inversion, and the exploitation of data leaks. The next category focuses on preventing the attacker from gaining access to the inference engine by enforcing access control mechanisms. Many of the works in this category use authentication, licensing, and weight permutation to restrict access only to users that are aware of the underlying patterns. This type of countermeasure is used broadly in mechanisms that aim to pro-tect against model and IP theft, unauthorised access and tampering, licence forgery and misuse, Key-Value (KV) leak, and cache attacks. Model obfuscation focuses on encoding certain pieces of information to conceal them from the adversaries, rendering reverse engineering assaults impractical. Existing works in the literature rely on two main techniques to obfuscate a model. The first considers the permutation of the model weights and parameters using secret or random patterns. The second type applies information reduction techniques to reduce the model accuracy. This is addressed by the works included in our analysis using model pruning and quantisation techniques. By employing this approach, the attacker only has access to the inputs and outputs of the model, rather than monitoring the inference engine internals. This category is effective in protecting the system from reverse engineering attacks, membership inference, model steal, and IP theft. Finally, the last two categories relate to improvements in the TEE isolated region. Specifically, TEE optimisations attempt to introduce enhancements to existing TEE architectures with the aim of executing more robust and accurate models. This is achieved with system-wide optimisations, such as efficient memory management, parallelisation strategies, and integration with accelerators. These improvements allow the execution of more computation-ally intensive AI models in the secure region, while increasing overall security. 

TEE extensions introduce new features to extend the secure regions or their existing functionality to integrate with the latest architectures. Examples of this category introduce enhancements towards securing the computations performed in GPU memory, or deliver separate isolated environments for multi-model processing architectures. Overall, TEE-related categories pro-tect against data leaks and privacy leaks during inference. 26 6.2. Model segmentation 

In this subsection, we analyse countermeasures that leverage partitioning and decomposition techniques. Table 9 offers an overview of each solution in reverse chronological order. The third column indicates which segmentation approach is followed by each proposal, i.e., partitioning vs decomposition. The fourth column presents the model family that is protected by the spe-cific defence solution, while the following column summarises the attacks or threats addressed by each work. Finally, it presents a description of the de-fence technique that each solution proposes, as well as the type of device on which the AI model is deployed. Based on the table, it seems that most of the solutions apply partition-ing, except two solutions that make use of decomposition and one combining both techniques. The majority of the research investigates countermeasures on DNN deployments, while four distinct works focus, respectively, on LLM, Graph Neural Network (GNN), Convolutional Neural Network (CNN) and Quantisation Neural Networks (QNN). As far as it concerns the attacks, ag-gressors rely mostly on model stealing/extraction and weight theft pattern to exploit the targeted models. These categories dominate with seven and six works respectively. It is worth noting that two distinct researches intro-duce the integer overflow vulnerability and the graph link-stealing attack. Regarding the proposed countermeasures, the main focus is placed on the elimination of the attack surface by hiding weights, activations and graph edges. A more detailed view of each research is given bellow. The work in [44] investigates model stealing attacks on QNN executed in edge environments. The authors introduce a partitioning solution, namely TEE-Shielded QNN Partition (TSQP), that transforms White-Box inference to Black-Box, by isolating certain scales in TEE. The scales denote the com-pression factor of a float so that it can fit into the integer range. In this respect, by shielding the scales in TEE, the attacker has access only to the quantised integer result that is conveyed in REE. On the same direction, the proposal provides a solution to the 8-bit quantisation issue that results in severe integer overflow vulnerabilities during inference [59]. To combat these issues, TSQP introduces parameter de-similarity (PDS) techniques which are effective against model stealing attacks, while in parallel they safeguard inference integrity. The authors of [45] present GNNVault, a secure method to protect the privacy and intellectual property of the model, building over the partition-before-training (PBT) strategy. Using a hybrid approach, the authors deploy 27 Work Year P/D AI Attack Countermeasure Device 

TSQP [44] 2025 P QNN Model Stealing, Model Extrac-tion, Integer Overflow, Infer-ence Integrity TSQP Edge GNNVault [45] 2025 P GNN Model Stealing, Model Extrac-tion, Graph Link-Stealing At-tack PBT Design with TEE-Secured Rectifier Edge TBNet [46] 2024 P DNN Weight Theft TEE-Based Two-Branch de-fence Edge TEESlice [47] 2024 P/D DNN, LLM Model Stealing, Model Extrac-tion, Training Data Exposure, Membership Inference, Model Inversion PBT with TEE-Isolated Pri-vate Weights Mobile Penetralium [48] 2024 D DNN Training Data Exposure, Membership Inference Attack, Model Inversion Attack Segmented TEE Inference with Confidence Perturba-tion Edge FakeNN [49] 2024 P DNN Model Stealing, Model Extrac-tion Segmented TEE Dual-Network with Backbone Degradation Edge MirrorNet [50] 2023 P DNN Model Stealing, Model Extrac-tion TEE-Protected Mirror Branch Edge LEAP [51] 2023 P DL Model Stealing, Model Extrac-tion, Membership Inference Lightweight Parallel TEE Mobile SecureQNN [52] 2023 P QNN Weight Theft, Freeze-and-Retrain QNN Layer Segmentation in TrustZone-M IoT TEESlice [53] 2023 P/D DNN Weight Theft, Pretrained-Model Side Information Attack, Freeze-and-Retrain, Membership Inference Attack, Model Inversion Attack PBT with TEE-Isolated Pri-vacy Slices Edge T-Slices [54] 2023 D DL, CNN Weight Theft, Intermediate Feature Leakage Dynamic Layer Slicing in TrustZone IoT ShadowNet [55] 2023 P ML Weight Theft, Architecture Extraction, Reverse Engi-neering, Intermediate Feature Leakage Secure GPU Offload via Weight Transformation Mobile Hybridtee [56] 2020 P DNN Weight Theft, Architecture Extraction, Reverse Engi-neering, Intermediate Feature Leakage, Inference Integrity SRAM-Optimized Secure Inference with Encrypted DRAM Mobile DarkneTZ [57] 2020 P DNN Membership Inference Attacks, Intermediate Feature Leakage Hardware-Assisted Layer Partitioning for Privacy-Preserving DNNs Edge [58] 2019 P DNN Weight Theft, Architecture Extraction TEE-Based Confidential In-ference for Proprietary Deep Learning Models Mobile 

Table 9: Countermeasure proposals based on model segmentation (P: partitioning, D: decomposition). 

28 two different models, namely the backbone and the rectifier, trained on public and private data, respectively. The first model is deployed in REE, while the second, i.e., the rectifier, in TEE. This design aims at producing rough embeddings in the REE, which are being rectified from the secure model that uses the real private graph in the secure enclave. The work in [46] introduces TBNet, a two-branch solution to safeguard DNN models from stealing attacks. This partitioning solution relies on two identical models running in the REE and TEE regions, respectively. During the training phase, the insecure model runs in the insecure area (REE) for performance, while being iteratively pruned so that it becomes useless to a potential attacker. In parallel, it transfers knowledge to the secure model residing in the secure region (TEE). At the inference step, the outputs from the two branches are merged inside the TEE and the result is filtered from a last classification layer which gives the prediction result. The only piece of information that is communicated outside of TEE is the final result. In the same vein, the research in [48] introduces penetralium, a system to protect model privacy on edge environments. The proposed solution pro-tects against model steal attacks, membership inference attacks, and model inversion attacks. The architecture leverages a computational engine (SGX engine) and a model converter that gradually decomposes the model into segments that can fit the TEE limitations. The sensitive pieces are executed in the secure region, while the rest in REE. After inference is completed, pen-etralium applies a lightweight perturbation policy to the model probability scores, so that the attacker cannot exploit them to launch privacy inference attacks. The authors in [49] introduce FakeNN, a secure inference framework, to combat model steal and adversarial attacks. FakeNN relies on a dual-architecture that splits and stores the model in a backbone and a lightweight network, respectively. One of the main advantages of the introduced ar-chitecture pertains to the limitation of the learning ability of the backbone model. Specifically, this aims at reducing the learning ability of the model, so that the only accurate inference result is obtained from the lightweight network inside the secure area. Finally, the authors enhance even more the secure network performance by integrating a channel attention mechanism that focuses on the important information channels. The work in [50] presents MirrorNet, a dual-layer partitioning framework to protect DNN deployments from model stealing attacks on edge devices. MirrorNet creates a lighter version of the DNN model that can be executed 29 inside the TEE with minimal delays. It operates with two main components, the backbone model and the companion partial monitor (CPM) running in-side the TEE. The last one resides in the secure region and corrects the intermediate layer results of the BackboneNet, ensuring model confidential-ity. Every time, during inference, CPM corrects the intermediate outputs generated from the BackboneNet using the secret knowledge stored in the TEE. The authors in [51] present LEAP, a partitioning method to protect against model inference attacks in mobile devices. LEAP is a lightweight developer-friendly TEE, devoted to mobile apps, that is used as an alterna-tive to ARM TrustZone. This lightweight system enables the execution of parallel protection sandboxes with easy access to peripherals like GPU, thus improving system flexibility. This setting enables the execution of multiple models, or intelligent applications to be executed securely within the same environment, thus making LEAP a very good candidate for multi-model ex-ecution on smartphones. The work in [52] explores the use of TrustZone-M to protect QNN privacy. The authors introduce SecureQNN, a partitioning framework that assesses the attacker’s effort on building a model with the same accuracy. SecureQNN traverses the model layer by layer and evaluates which layers are more sensi-tive. That is, it selects those that require the minimum training effort from the attacker’s perspective. Those layers are loaded into the Trustzone-M area, while the rest remain outside, in the insecure regions. The authors in [47] conduct a benchmark of several TEE-shielded DNN Partition (TSDP) solutions and highlight their limitations. The authors extend their own previous work by introducing TEESlice, a novel hybrid strategy to protect sensitive neural network models in TEE [53, 60]. A sig-nificant security issue addressed in these works, concern model stealing and membership inference attacks, where an attacker may compromise the model weights and user data at the TEE layer. To address this issue, TEESlice implements a combination of partitioning and decomposition techniques, specifically a partition-before-training approach, which effectively separates privacy-sensitive weights from other components of the model and provides Black-Box level protection by only shielding slices in TEEs. The proposed solution is designed for TEE-based systems, such as edge and mobile devices. The research in [54] proposes T-Slices, a novel system to protect the integrity and confidentiality of DL models on IoT devices. The proposed solution overcomes the resource footprint limitations of executing DL models 30 in the ARM TrustZone by decomposing each model layer into smaller slices. During execution, each of the slices is sequentially loaded into TrustZone and the decryption takes place gradually. Bear in mind that batch processing is also possible by sending multiple layers for processing at once. The output of each layer is kept securely in the secure region, so that each new layer can process the previous output. In contrast to other solutions, the proposed system does not modify the original model, and thus the original prediction accuracy remains unaffected. The paper in [55] presents Shadownet, a partitioning architecture to pro-tect against model stealing attacks. The solution focuses on the problem of TEE-based solutions which operate inside the secure area and do not take advantage of the AI accelerators running in REE. More specifically, the pro-posed approach outsources the computationally heavy linear model layers in the untrusted accelerators. This is achieved by transforming the weights in a way that cannot be recovered by an attacker. After the computations are completed, the results are securely reverted again inside the TEE. The authors of [56] proposed Hybridtee, a system that protects DL and LLMs running on mobile devices against threats, such as model stealing and data privacy leakage at the TEE layer. Specifically, Hybridtee implements a novel partitioning approach that strategically divides the DL model into local and remote components, executing the sensitive parts in a local TEE and the less sensitive parts in a remote TEE. The proposed solution is designed for devices that support ARM TrustZone and Intel SGX, such as smartphones and edge servers. Hybridtee also ensures the security and integrity of the model inference process by using secure communication protocols and en-cryption techniques to protect the data exchanged between local and remote TEEs. The authors evaluated Hybridtee on a range of DL models, includ-ing Darknet19 and GoogLeNet, and reported promising results in terms of security, performance, and scalability. The authors of [57] propose DarkneTZ, a framework that protects DL models, including LLMs, on edge devices. A significant security issue ad-dressed in the paper is model stealing and membership inference attacks, to steal the model weights and user data at the TEE layer. DarkneTZ imple-ments a partitioning strategy that separates sensitive layers of the model and executes them in a trusted environment, ensuring the security and integrity of the model inference process. The proposed solution is designed for devices that support ARM TrustZone, such as smartphones and IoT devices. The authors of [58] present a partitioning system that protects DL and 31 Work Year AI Attack Countermeasure Device                                          

> [61] 2025 CNN Black-Box Model Stealing, Forged Licenses Style-Driven Li-censing Edge [62] 2025 TinyML Tampering With Models, Unau-thorized Access EAT-Based Dual Attestation for TinyML and Platform Integrity Edge IoTCloak [63] 2025 TinyML Tampering With Models, Unau-thorized Access Cortex-M Secure Inference via TEE and Watchpoints IoT CoreGuard [64] 2024 LLM Black-Box Model Stealing TEE-Protected Row/Column Per-mutation for LLM Anti-Stealing Edge EdgePro [65] 2024 DL Black-Box Model Stealing, Unau-thorized Access Neuron-Level Password-Based Model Lock Edge TransLinkGuard [66] 2024 LLM Black-Box Model Stealing, Unau-thorized Access TEE-Protected Row/Column Per-mutation Locking Edge SecureDL [67] 2021 DNN Model Stealing, Model Extraction N/A Mobile TCFDL [68] 2021 ML Input Data Leak-age, Inference In-tegrity TEE-enablead trusted collabora-tion framework IoT

Table 10: Countermeasure proposals based on Access Control. 

LLMs running on ARM-based devices, such as smartphones and IoT devices, by leveraging the TrustZone security extension. The proposed system imple-ments a secure inference framework that uses the TrustZone environment to protect the model and user data, ensuring the security and integrity of the model inference process. The system has been evaluated on a range of DL models, including MobileNet and ResNet, and has shown promising results in terms of security, performance, and power consumption. 

6.3. Access control 

This part offers an analysis of works that employ access control mecha-nisms to prevent unauthorised access to the model internals and the inference process. Table 10 provides an overview of the access control solutions exam-ined in this section. The research in [61] presents a solution to protect against intellectual property hijacking and unauthorised access to AI models running on edge 32 devices. The proposed mechanism leverages the image style aspect to create a licensing mechanism for access control. That is, the model is trained using certain image style data, used as a licence, so that any inappropriate input with misaligned data will make the model fail. The process is driven by the licence generator, which consists of a lightweight, real-time style transfer model that is executed directly on the edge. The aim of this component is to embed a predefined style into the models operational framework, so that a potential attacker is prevented from executing successful inference requests. The research in [62] introduces a dual attestation mechanism to protect from tampering and unauthorised access assaults against TinyML models running in IoT devices. This work bridges a literature gap by ensuring both the integrity of the AI model and the device. The core of the proposal relies on Entity Attestation Tokens (EAT). More specifically, the authors propose the creation of the first token inside the TEE that signs claims related to the device. The second token, namely Machine Learning Entity Attestation (ML-EAT), contains details about the model, and it is signed with keys provisioned securely into the secure region. The authors of [63] propose IoTCloak to protect IoT systems from model integrity attacks. The system leverages hardware watchpoints to ensure that specific regions of the memory used to store the ML code and models cannot be altered. Additionally, the authors introduce cryptographic accelerators (CRYA) to compute SHA-256 digests for sensitive pieces of information that watchpoints cannot cover. Finally, an additional feature of this work is the handling of watchpoint-triggered write exceptions, which are routed to the secure sections so that they cannot be tampered with. The research in [64] presents CoreGuard, a mechanism to prevent LLM steal in edge devices. This work focuses on the protection of general-purpose LLMs, and their foundational capabilities, which differentiate from existing solutions that usually monitor task-related parameters. This is why the authors introduce the term foundational capability stealing, which indicates that a stolen edge-deployed LLM can be used as a backbone for generic tasks, leveraging the general reasoning ability of the model. Regarding the proposed protection, in the first phase the system relies on model locking, a process that permutes the weights of the linear layers, to restrict access by rendering the model non-functional. The user needs to know how to swap the input so that they match the permutation pattern, and the authorisation is successful. In the second phase, the authors introduce an efficient self-propagation mechanism to automatically permute the outputs of each layer, 33 saving this way communication overhead. The work in [65] presents EdgePro, a solution to prevent model steal and unauthorised model access on edge devices. Instead of encrypting the complete model, EdgePro selects and locks certain neurons which are used as authorisation points. To achieve that, the proposed solution alters the activation values of the selected neurons, with the aim of preventing attackers from using the model if they are not aware of the pattern. During inference, model activations are compared with stored configuration values to identify that the model is executed in the legitimate environment. The authors of [66] propose TransLinkGuard, a plug-and-play transformer model protection approach, which can protect LLMs and other transformer-based models against model stealing attacks. A significant security issue addressed in the paper is model stealing in the TEE layer. To counter this issue, TransLinkGuard implements a permutation strategy to protect the model weights, and integrates the authorisation mechanism with a linear layer, which involves more parameters and makes the authorisation process harder to violate. The proposed solution is designed for devices that support TEEs, such as edge devices. The authors of [67] propose SecureDL, a system that aims to protect DL models, including LLMs, on edge devices from model stealing. To achieve this, SecureDL implements a secure inference framework that uses homomor-phic encryption and differential privacy to protect model and user data. The proposed solution is designed for devices that support ARM TrustZone, such as smartphones and IoT devices. The authors in [68] introduce a trusted and collaborative framework for deep learning (TCFDL) for IoT and edge devices. The paper addresses the limitations of IoT devices in executing AI models on edge nodes, while con-sidering privacy implications. The framework relies on a hardware-based TEE module and introduces two different mechanisms to ensure data trans-mission security. The first one uses traditional TLS, but each intermediate proxy performs decryption and re-encryption inside a TEE. In the second, the data remain encrypted throughout transit since in each proxy they are re-encrypted without previously being decrypted. 

6.4. Obfuscation 

This subsection analyses works that employ obfuscation schemes to pre-vent privacy leakages. An overview of the obfuscation-based defence mecha-nisms discussed in this section is summarised in Table 11. 34 Work Year AI Attack Countermeasure Device 

GroupCover [69] 2024 DNN Weight Theft, Black-Box Model Stealing, Pretrained-Model Side Information, Architec-ture Extraction TEE-Based Random-ized Model Obfusca-tion Edge, IoT [70] 2024 DNN Membership Inference, Data Leakage during Inference Layer-Isolation Obfus-cation Against MIAs Edge KV-Shield [71] 2024 LLM Intermediate Feature Leakage TEE-Secured KV Per-mutation Obfuscation Mobile, IoT CustomDLCoder [72] 2024 DL Model Stealing, Model Extraction Model-Less Deploy-ment for Model Hiding Mobile, IoT Dynamo [73] 2024 DL Architecture Ex-traction, Reverse Engineering Homomorphic-Inspired Runtime Obfuscation Mobile, IoT Modelobfuscator [74] 2023 DL Architecture Ex-traction, Reverse Engineering Reverse-Engineering–Resistant Model Obfuscation Mobile, IoT Model Protection [75] 2022 ML Weight Theft Enclave-Controlled Model Degradation defence Edge MMGuard [76] 2021 DNN Illegal Copy/Piracy, Tampering with models App-Anchored Model Obfuscation Mobile 

Table 11: Countermeasure proposals based on Obfuscation techniques. 

35 The research in [69] presents GroupCover, a scheme that protects DNN models from stealing attacks. The proposed solution prevents at-tackers from exploiting the inherent randomness vulnerability of existing model-obfuscation techniques. The solution operates in two phases, the first one performed offline is devoted to preprocessing and model obfuscation, whereas the second one is online and concerns inference. During the offline step, the private model parameters are randomly obfuscated, without follow-ing a specific strategy. Because the resulting obfuscation is indistinguishable from random guessing, an attacker gains no useful information, making the protection robust against inference attacks. In the online inference step, the obfuscated model is used for the computations in the GPU, and the relevant results are reconstructed inside the TEE using some random parameters to safely reverse the result. The authors in [70] present a solution to protect edge AI deployments from membership inference attacks. In the initial step, the partitioning tech-nique is applied to split the model into two parts: the first is stored in the REE, while the second one, which contains the more sensitive layers, is exe-cuted inside the TEE. By protecting a configurable number of layers inside the TEE, the attacker cannot access their output and thus the MIA attack is impractical. On top of that, the authors apply quantisation in order to optimise the inference process and reduce the memory footprint. This ob-fuscation effect results in noisy outputs that cannot be reverse-engineered by an aggressor. The authors of [71] investigate LLMs deployed on edge devices equipped with GPUs. They consider protection against KV-pair leakages emitted dur-ing the inference process. These pieces of information can be eavesdropped by an attacker to reconstruct the complete conversation, and thus expose sensitive data. To protect against this vulnerability, the authors introduce KV-Shield, a system that protects KV pairs using weight permutation. That is, during the initialisation phase, the weight matrices are permuted, and thus the KV pairs are scrambled. During the runtime phase, the KV pairs used by the attention mechanism are restored to their original form inside the TEE, so they are never exposed to potential attackers. The authors of [72] propose CustomDLCoder, a novel method to generate pure code implementations of DL models, which can protect DL models against model stealing and reverse engineering attacks. This security threat is particularly relevant at the on-device deployment layer. To counter this issue, CustomDLCoder implements a code generation approach that removes 36 explicit model representations, making it difficult for attackers to extract model information. The proposed solution is designed for devices such as smartphones, including Android devices, and can be used to deploy various DL models, including MobileNet and GPT-2. The authors of [73] propose Dynamo, a system that protects DL models on mobile devices. A substantial threat addressed in the paper is model stealing, to leak the model weights and user data. To counter this issue, Dynamo implements a dynamic model obfuscation strategy that couples obfuscated DL model operators, which ensures the security and integrity of the model inference process. The proposed solution is designed for devices such as Android smartphones. Research [74] proposes a novel system called Modelobfuscator which aims to protect DL models on mobile devices by obfuscating the model’s structure and parameters. The proposed solution overcomes the model stealing issue by making it harder for attackers to extract the model’s information, without affecting the original model’s prediction accuracy or modifying the model it-self. This is achieved through five obfuscation strategies, including renaming, parameter encapsulation, and neural structure obfuscation, which effectively resist model parsing tools and provide extra security for smart apps, despite the fact that this comes with the cost of an increased deliverable size. The authors of [75] propose Model Protection, a system that protects DL models, including CNNs, running on edge devices. A significant security issue addressed in the paper is model stealing, where an attacker may steal the model weights and user data at the TEE layer. To address this issue, the authors propose a secure enclave-based inference service that adds crafted random values to the model weights, making it difficult for attackers to steal the model. The proposed solution is designed for devices that support Intel SGX, such as edge servers and smartphones. The authors of [76] propose MMGuard, a system that protects DL mod-els, including LLMs, on Android devices. A significant security issue ad-dressed is model stealing and tampering, where an attacker may leak the model weights and the user data. To counter this issue, MMGuard imple-ments a mutual authentication mechanism between the Android app and the DL model, which ensures the security and integrity of the model inference process. In order to achieve that, the authors introduce a new input branch that takes owner-related signature information to enforce access control. The proposed solution is designed for devices such as Android smartphones. 37 Work Year AI Attack Countermeasure Device                                          

> Smartzone [77] 2025 DNN, LLM Model Stealing, Tam-pering/Fault Injection, Data Leakage During Inference Multi-Optimized Trusted Inference on TrustZone IoT Smart-Zone [78] 2024 DNN Data Leakage During Inference Adaptive Memory-Optimized TEE Inference Runtime IoT [79] 2023 DNN Membership Inference Attack, Inference In-tegrity TEE-Optimized Pruning and Partitioning Mobile GuardiaNN [80] 2022 DNN Physical Memory At-tacks TEE-Accelerated Secure DNN Execution Through Memory and Crypto Offloading Mobile, IoT SecDeep [81] 2021 DNN Data leakage during in-ference, Inference In-tegrity Secure GPU-Accelerated Inference Optimization in TrustZone Mobile, IoT OMG [82] 2020 RNN Data leakage during in-ference TEE-Based Secure Offline Inference Isolation in ARM TrustZone Mobile

Table 12: Countermeasure proposals based on TEE optimisations. 

6.5. TEE optimisations 

This subsection investigates works that optimise the TEE environment to reduce resource footprint while strengthening the security guarantees of on-device model execution. The works analysed in this category are summarised in Table 12. The authors of [77] propose Smartzone, a runtime support for secure and efficient on-device inference on ARM TrustZone, which can protect various AI models, including DL models and LLMs. A significant security issue addressed in the paper is model stealing and data leak at the TEE layer, where the model inference takes place. To counter this issue, Smartzone im-plements a trusted inference-oriented operator set, proactive multi-threading parallel support, and on-demand secure memory management, ensuring the security and integrity of the model inference process. The proposed solution is designed for devices that support ARM TrustZone. The authors in [78] present Smart-Zone, a novel memory management solution that aims to enhance model and inference data privacy. The ap-proach relies on the adaptation of the secure memory size to fit the demands of the pre-trained DNN models. This is achieved by adapting the memory priorities based on the model being used. Moreover, it assigns priorities 38 to memory regions in order to avoid conflicts. Also, the authors present Tinylib, a lightweight library designed for efficient inference inside the Trust-Zone. This approach does not target model partitioning; rather, it leverages both the secure and non secure worlds to complete the inference. In [79], the authors acknowledge the problem of executing DNN models on mobile platforms and present a novel approach to securely execute such models on mobile devices. First, they propose to prune the model by remov-ing redundant neurons that do not affect the overall accuracy. By using this approach, the authors optimise model execution as they preserve only the necessary parts. The model is also partitioned to fit and execute efficiently in the mobile TEE. After applying the pruning strategy, the proposed solu-tion deallocates the occupied memory to improve the overall footprint. The authors of [80] present GuardiaNN, a system to tackle physical at-tacks, such as cold boot, on mobile and embedded devices. The authors focus on the DRAM region of a TEE which stores unencrypted sensitive data. That is, secure regions such as TrustZone do not offer protection on the memory level, and thus they become easily exploitable by aggressors. The proposed solution relies on the encryption of sensitive data in DRAM so that they re-main protected, but it loads and decrypts the data in SRAM when required. To reduce the swap overhead, the authors propose to use direct convolutions, which reduces DRAM accesses. Additionally, they propose mechanisms to re-use the data in SRAM, so that swapping is eliminated. Finally, the CPU is decoupled from the encryption/decryption overhead and these operations are executed in dedicated hardware inside the SoC. The authors of [81] propose SecDeep, a system that protects DL mod-els, including LLMs, against model stealing and data privacy leakage is-sues, where an attacker may compromise the model weights and user data at the TEE layer. To counter this issue, the authors implemented a secure inference framework that uses a combination of hardware-based TEE and software-based encryption techniques to protect the model and user data. The proposed solution is designed for devices that support ARM TrustZone, such as smartphones and IoT devices. SecDeep also ensures the integrity of the model and the underlying computation framework, and can maintain the performance of DL inference on the edge by securely interfacing on-device ac-celerators with TEEs. Additionally, SecDeep has been evaluated in a range of DL models, including SqueezeNet and MobileNet, and has shown promising results in terms of security and performance. The authors in [82] introduce the Offline Model Guard (OMG). The so-39 lution focuses on securing the data, model and processing algorithms using an optimised TEE-based architecture. The solution targets ARM devices and leverages TrustZone to achieve isolation among the different hardware components. More specifically, this work aims to overcome the performance challenges of traditional TEE solutions, by leveraging unprivileged user-space enclaves using SANCTUARY [83]. That is, OMG takes advantage of the per-formance of the insecure region that is secured using TrustZone components like the TrustZone Address Space Controller (TZASC) and the TrustZone Protection Controller (TZPC). 

6.6. TEE extensions 

This part presents the works that extend TEE capabilities, enhancing security against data leaks and privacy breaches. More specifically, it includes solutions that make use of the GPU or investigate multi-enclave deployments. Table 13 offers an overview of the solutions in reverse chronological order. The authors in [84] introduce a framework to assess the execution of ML models in ARM-based mobile devices. The main pillar of this work concerns the evaluation of the Confidential Compute Architecture (CCA) technology with respect to the performance-privacy trade-offs. Using this approach, the authors extend the typical inference capabilities incorporated in existing TEE environments, towards a more efficient and secure region. In order to achieve that, CCA is designed using the Realm Management Extension (RME), a new component which introduces additional secure regions namely realms. This region is a TEE-like, special virtual machine, that is de-privileged, as it has only virtualised access to the system resources. Overall, the aim of the analysis is to evaluate whether CCA is sufficient countermeasure against data privacy attacks, including Membership Inference Attacks (MIA) and intellectual property violations. The authors of [85] propose ASGARD, a virtualisation-based TEE solu-tion that can protect on-device DNNs on legacy Armv8-A SoCs. A significant security issue addressed in the paper is model stealing at the TEE layer. To counter this issue, ASGARD implements secure accelerator I/O passthrough, Trusted Computing Base reduction techniques, and exit-coalescing DNN ex-ecution planning, ensuring the security and integrity of the model inference process. The proposed solution is designed for Android devices. The work in [86] highlights the limitations of existing TEE environments when multi-model execution is necessary. More specifically, the authors high-light the lack of multi-enclave solutions when more than one AI model are 40 Work Year AI Attack Countermeasure Device Type 

[84] 2025 ML Model Stealing, Model Ex-traction, Membership In-ference, Memory Leakage, Tampering with models Arm CCA TEE extension for Low-Overhead Confidential Infer-ence Mobile, IoT ASGARD [85] 2025 DNN Model Stealing, Model Extraction, Data Leak-age During Inference, Unauthorized Access, Tampering with Models, Memory Leakage, Side Channels Virtualization-Extended TEE Boundary for Se-cure Accelerated Inference Mobile [86] 2024 ML Black-Box Model Steal-ing (Inter-Enclave), Input Data Leakage (Malicious Model) Multi-Enclave TEE Extension for On-Device ML Isolation Mobile, IoT Devlore [87] 2024 N/A Malicious Interrupts, Memory Leakage TEE-Extended Pe-ripheral Access via CCA Realm Isola-tion Mobile, IoT GuaranTEE [88] 2024 ML Model Stealing, Model Ex-traction, Tampering with Models CCA Realm En-claves for Model Privacy and Verifi-able Edge Inference Mobile, IoT StrongBox [89] 2022 NN Memory Leakage, Unau-thorized Access TrustZone-Extended GPU TEE for Secure Unified-Memory Acceleration Mobile, IoT [90] 2020 ML Training Data Exposure TEE-Boundary Extensions with Homomorphic QoS Protection Edge 

Table 13: Countermeasure proposals based on TEE extensions. 

41 executed on-device. This stems from the fact that multiple applications on the same device that use AI models would need to utilise more than one enclave to protect themselves from model stealing and tampering attacks. Taking this as a basis, the authors explore the features of RISC-V implemen-tations regarding multi-enclaves such as keystone and MultiZone. The authors of [87] propose Devlore, a system that protects various AI models, including LLMs and DL models, on ARM-based devices. A signifi-cant security issue addressed is model stealing and interrupt-based attacks, where an attacker may steal the model weights and user data at TEE layer. To counter this issue, Devlore implements a two-GPT design and interrupt isolation mechanisms, which ensure the security and integrity of the model inference process. The proposed solution is designed for devices that support ARM architecture, such as smartphones and embedded devices. The authors of [88] propose GuaranTEE, a system that protects ma-chine learning models, including DL models, on edge devices. A high risk addressed in the paper is model stealing and tampering, compromising the model weights and user data at the TEE layer. To counter this issue, Guaran-TEE implements a framework that uses ARM’s Confidential Computing Ar-chitecture (CCA) to provide attestable and private machine learning, which ensures the security and integrity of the model inference process. The pro-posed solution is designed for devices that support ARM architecture, such as smartphones and IoT devices. The work in [89] enhances the GPU security of ARM-based endpoints to prevent sensitive info leakage inside the GPU. The work introduces Strong-Box, the first TEE running on a GPU that is flexible, without targeting only secure inference, but rather it generalises to secure computation. This is achieved using isolated execution environments accessible only by the GPU. StrongBox leverages a smart way to reduce the runtime overhead by tagging specific GPU buffers as secure. The authors in [90] present a framework to secure QoS data on edge networks. More specifically, the authors propose a solution that safeguards the service composition process. The existing works in the literature rely on plaintext QoS data to assess which services need to be composed or which tasks and how they should be distributed to end-devices, causing privacy leaks. The proposed framework offers a QoS composition service that can be executed on encrypted data using Fully Homomorphic Encryption (FHE). 42 7. Discussion 

A survey of the attack literature shows common themes that currently define the threat environment. The works surveyed are presented chronolog-ically in Figure 2, sorted into the six threat categories defined in Section 5. The attack category most explored is Adversarial with 6 works, of which 4 are Blackbox attacks, followed by Intellectual Property with 4. Physical, Data Privacy and Integrity attacks each contribute 2 works, while availability is the least explored category with only 1 study. From a temporal perspective, adversarial attacks are a category of continuous interest, since research on this topic has been consistently published from 2021 to 2024. On a year-by-year basis, 2024 has the highest concentration of publications, with a total of 8 works, reflecting the growing research interest in on-device AI security in recent years. Considering the entire period 2021-2024, it is clear that re-search concentrated on adversarial and intellectual property attacks, whereas other threat vectors affecting on-device AI have received relatively limited attention, with only a couple of studies addressing each of these categories. Table 14 summarises the effectiveness and scope of the attacks discussed in Section 5. Physical attacks, including hardware and system-based attacks, are the most potent and reliable. GPU timing attacks, for example, achieved a perfect 100% success rate. Model theft and intellectual property attacks achieved success rates between 33.83% and 99%. This often varies depending on the black-box query budgets and the complexity of target architectures. Adversarial attacks also vary widely in effectiveness (10.23%-99.12%), as their success depends mainly on query efficiency and perturbation budget. Privacy attacks report a narrow success range (92%-93%), which likely reflects lim-ited coverage in the surveyed literature, not consistently high success rates. The above rate demonstrates the practical feasibility of tampering with de-ployed models. On the other hand, Integrity attacks such as DeepPayload, reached a success rate of 93.5% but with a wide range, starting from 20%. Finally, Availability attacks against end devices manage to increase battery consumption up to 21% without sacrifising the model accuracy. Against this threat landscape, Figure 3 provides an overview of the core defence strategy employed in each study, organising defence solutions in chronological order. Every work is illustrated using a different shape based on the fundamental AI category it explores. In this respect, circles depict works that discuss countermeasures on DNN/DL deployments and dashed circles CNN models. Rectangles highlight research that investigate protection mea-43 Physical (2) 

Intellectual 

Property (4) 

Adversarial (6) 

Data 

Privacy (2) 

Integrity (2) 

2021  2022  2023  2024 

[27] [28] 

[29]  [30] 

[31]  [32] 

[34]  [33] [35] [36] [38]  [37] 

[40]  [39] 

[41] [42] 

Availability (1)  [43] Figure 2: Attack taxonomy. 

44 Category Range Peak Observation             

> Physical 97.2-100% 100% (GPU-timing) Side-channels very effective Intellectual Property 33.83-99% 99% (REDLC) ML-based reconstruction dominates Adversarial Attacks 10.23-99.12% 99.12% (GenDroid) Query efficiency critical Data Privacy 92-93% 93% (recall) High effectiveness against FL Integrity 20-93.5% 93.5% (DeepPayload) Tampering highly successful Availability 14-21% 21% (Sponge Poisoning) Newer, more advanced mobile processors are more vulnerable to Sponge Poisoning
> Table 14: Attack effectiveness by category.

sures against attacks on LLMs, while dashed rectangles indicate solutions for TinyML. Triangles depict GNN-related articles and dashed triangles works that protect ML models. In contrast, diamonds identify publications that investigate QNN-based systems, and finally, heptagons denote RNNs. On a year-by-year basis, the research interest into on-device inference protection increased from 1 paper in 2019, to 3 to 4 papers per year between 2020 and 2022, and more than 8 papers per year between 2023 and 2025, with a peak of 14 works in 2024. Regarding the classification of defences, model segmen-tation emerges as a prominent approach, with 15 works spanning the period from 2019 to 2025. The majority of the studies in this category was published from 2023 to 2025, whereas only three works were published in 2019-2020. In contrast, the access control domain is maturing at a slower pace, with only 2 works in 2021, and with 3 studies in each of the years 2024 and 2025. The obfuscation category has experienced an equal growth in terms of numbers with the access control category, but with an uneven distribution across the considered years. More specifically, 2 works were published in 2022, 1 in 2023, and the remaining 5 works were published in 2024. Finally, the TEE domains have contributed a moderate number of studies. Specifically, TEE optimisations yielded a total of 6 works, with almost one per year from 2020 to 2025. Similarly, the TEE extensions category comprises 2 works from 2020 45 2019 2020 2021 2022 2023 2024 2025     

> [57]
> [58] [51]
> [53] [49] [48]
> [47]
> Model
> Segmentation
> (15)
> Obfuscation
> (8)
> Access
> Control
> (8)
> TEE
> optimisations
> (6)
> [85]
> [62]
> [71]
> [56] [50]
> [64]
> [80] [81]
> [76]
> [70]
> [78]
> [67]
> [73]
> [52]
> [74]
> [63]
> [69]
> [89]
> [72]
> [79]
> NN/
> DNN/
> DL
> QNN
> RNN
> GNN
> Tiny
> ML
> LLM
> CNN
> [61]
> [54]
> TEE
> extensions
> (6)
> [44] [45] [46]
> ML
> [55]
> [65]
> [66]
> [68]
> [75]
> [77]
> [84] [86] [88] [90]
> [82]
> Model
> Types

Figure 3: Protection mechanisms’ taxonomy. Each shape represents the AI model that was examined in each work (circles: DNN/DL, dashed circles: CNN, rectangles: LLM, dashed rectangles: TinyML, triangles: GNN, dashed triangles: ML, diamonds: QNN, heptagons: RNN). 

to 2022, 2 works in 2024, and 2 works in 2025. An additional pillar that shapes the map of defence solutions is the type of AI model being protected. As Figure 3 illustrates, the majority of papers focus on defending DNN/DL deployments, denoted by circles. In total, 25 solutions were published between 2019 and 2025 in this category, with a notable peak of 9 publications in 2024. In particular, DNN/DL is the only model type represented across all attack categories and examined years. In contrast, solutions addressing LLMs, marked as rectangles, are relatively scarce, with only 5 publications exclusively in 2024 and 2025, reflecting the recent emergence of this research area. For TinyML, only 2 articles were 46 published in 2025 that focused solely on integrity. Work on QNNs and CNNs has been limited to 2 articles each, both of which address intellectual property concerns in 2023 and 2025. RNNs and GNNs have each been covered by a single publication, appearing in 2020 and 2025, respectively, with distinct research directions. Both address data privacy considerations. Overall, the analysis of defence solutions proves that the research in-terest is mostly gathered around DL/DNN approaches. This shift towards DL/DNN can be justified from the wide adoption of these deployments in real-world systems. Regarding the other AI paradigms, the reduced number of studies signifies that the specific areas are quite immature, leaving open space for new contributions. Nevertheless, the research community in this area seems also to consider other model types than DL/DNN, as seen by the emerge of works protecting LLMs (5 works in 2024-2025) and TinyML mod-els (2 works in 2025). As the weaker AI categories attract more attention, we expect a higher number of defence contributions in these categories over the next few years. A further dimension to consider in this analysis is the category of attacks addressed by each protection mechanism; Figure 4 depicts a mapping of pro-tection mechanisms to attack categories. Notably, the intellectual property and data privacy categories attract significant attention within the research community, as evidenced by the substantial number of studies dedicated to these areas, with 27 and 10 research works, respectively. By contrast, ad-versarial and availability threats do not appear in the figure, as we found no defence papers that explicitly mitigate these attacks. Only three studies ad-dress integrity threats, and a further three protect against physical attacks. Finally, the distribution by publication year shows that 14 defence papers were published in 2024, followed by 8 in 2023 and 9 in 2025. 

8. Challenges & future directions 

With AI models blooming on a daily basis, edge and mobile devices are becoming the new paradigm to deliver privacy-preserving AI services. This paradigm offers significant advantages for certain, regulated industries that need to meet strict security and privacy requirements stipulated by regula-tion, such as the Cyber Resilience Act (CRA) [91], the General Data Pro-tection Regulation (GDPR) [92], and the EU Artificial Intelligence Act (AI Act) [93], which often prohibit the transfer of sensitive customer data to the cloud and aim to ensure the safe and responsible development of AI. By 47 2019 2020 2021 2022 2023 2024 2025 

[56] 

[57] 

[50] 

[51] 

[48] 

[47] 

[46] 

Physical (3) 

Data 

Privacy (10) 

Intellectual 

Property 

(27) 

Integrity (3) 

[62] 

[71] 

[49] 

[82] 

[64] 

[66] 

[77] 

[79] 

[80] 

[89] 

[53] [69] 

[67] [58] 

[74] [72] 

[85] 

[65] 

[52] 

[44] 

[73] 

[63] 

[81] [70] [45] 

[61] 

[54] 

NN/ 

DNN/ 

DL 

QNN 

RNN 

GNN 

Tiny 

ML 

LLM 

CNN 

ML 

Model 

Types 

[84] 

[78] 

[86] 

[88] 

[55] 

[75] 

[76] 

[68] [90] Figure 4: Mapping of defences to attack categories. 

48 leveraging on-device AI inference, companies can effectively address privacy-sensitive market segments, opening new business opportunities. However, this approach introduces also a set of challenges, mainly related to the inher-ent constraints of mobile devices, such as limited computational power and energy storage, as well as security vulnerabilities. One of the primary challenges in on-device AI inference is the optimisation of models for resource-constrained devices. Model compression techniques, including pruning and quantisation, are essential for deploying large models on edge devices. However, these techniques often involve trade-offs between model size and accuracy, requiring careful consideration of the specific appli-cation requirements. For example, the size of the tiny version of the Whisper model for client-side transcription is around 40MB [94]. This optimisation has implications on the inference result as the accuracy remains low, high-lighting the need for more advanced model optimisation techniques. Linking this limitation to on-device inference security, model compression can poten-tially introduce security vulnerabilities in the model, by creating new attack surfaces or making the model more susceptible to attacks, including adver-sarial [95] or model inversion attacks [96]. Resource limitations could also have an impact on the availability of secu-rity mechanisms on resource-constrained devices. This implies that deploying security mechanisms such as encryption or intrusion detection systems may be constrained or weakened. In particular, state-of-the-art techniques (e.g., homomorphic encryption or differential privacy) may be impractical to run effectively, leaving the device more vulnerable to attacks. Another challenge is the diversity of edge devices, which makes it diffi-cult to develop a common solution that can operate on devices with differ-ent computational capabilities, memory constraints, and power consumption characteristics. For example, a different data protection solution is needed in a laptop compared to an RFID tag. Shielding edge devices with robust secu-rity mechanisms is not always possible, but other approaches can be adopted. For example, some solutions on this front concern hardware acceleration or other hybrid methods, such as differential privacy and perturbation [15]. Het-erogeneous computing architectures that combine CPUs, GPUs, and Neural Processing Units (NPUs) are critical for balancing power-performance effi-ciency in on-device AI. However, the development of efficient accelerators that can adapt to different performance, power, and cost constraints remains an open challenge. Overall, one direction to protect AI deployments on edge devices con-49 cerns the use of the defence mechanisms that have been analysed in Sec-tion 6. Another major direction is improving model design for efficient edge inference. Future research should focus on developing architectures that are specifically designed for edge deployment, balancing accuracy, efficiency, ro-bustness and security. To this end, Neural Architecture Search (NAS) can automate the discovery of compact model architectures optimised for spe-cific edge devices [97]. Moreover, hardware-aware NAS considers the target hardware characteristics during the search process, enabling the discovery of architectures that achieve optimal performance on specific devices. Efficient models can enhance privacy by making on-device inference more feasible. At the same time, future research could consider hardware-aware NAS with multi-objective optimisation that factors in robustness against adversarial attacks alongside hardware efficiency, creating more secure models for real-world deployment [98]. One promising technique that could contribute to privacy protection is unlearning. It enables on-device AI models to forget or remove the influence of specific training data or experiences, which can be particularly useful in scenarios where data is no longer relevant, has been compromised, or needs to be deleted for privacy or regulatory reasons. With unlearning, models can be updated to remove the impact of sensitive or outdated data, improving data privacy and reducing the risk of model inversion attacks. Moreover, unlearning can help organisations comply with regulations such as GDPR, which requires that personal data be deleted upon request. However, de-veloping effective unlearning techniques that can balance data removal with model performance is a challenging task, and ensuring that data is truly for-gotten and not retained in any form is crucial to prevent potential security risks. As a future direction, researchers and developers can explore various unlearning algorithms and techniques, such as differential privacy and secure data deletion, to improve the security and privacy of on-device AI inference and enable the development of more trustworthy and compliant AI models. On the regulatory front, future research should contribute to the devel-opment of standards for on-device AI, including standards for performance measurement, security evaluation, and interoperability. Standardised ap-proaches will facilitate the comparison of different solutions and enable more efficient system integration. Moreover, regulatory compliance tools and tech-niques should be developed to help AI developers meet the requirements of emerging regulations. This includes tools for privacy impact assessment and explainability that can demonstrate compliance without compromising pri-50 vacy. 

9. Conclusions 

On-device inference has rapidly moved from a highly-specialised domain to a mainstream design choice for privacy-sensitive and latency-critical ap-plications. Given that existing review works lack a detailed analysis of the security aspects of on-device AI inference, this paper presents a survey of the associated security threats and defensive mechanisms on edge and mobile devices. To better organise and present the surveyed literature, we propose taxonomies of both attacks and defences, and additionally organise the anal-ysed works chronologically by publication year. Our results have shown that the resulting threat landscape is both broad and practically exploitable: across 2019–2025, published attacks demonstrate high success rates, with at least one attack having 93% effectiveness or more, across all attack categories. Moreover, nearly half of the surveyed attack papers were published in 2024, with the remainder appearing between 2021 and 2023, indicating a recent rise in research interest on the topic. The most actively researched attack vector is adversarial threats, covering 35% of the 17 reviewed publications. Against this background, the defence literature remains unevenly dis-tributed. Regarding the strategies used by inference protection mecha-nisms, around one third of the studied solutions rely on model segmenta-tion, whereas there is a balance in the usage of other defence techniques. A key observation emerges when mapping defences to the threats they address. Our mapping of 44 defence papers indicates that around two thirds prioritise intellectual property protection, even though intellectual property attacks ac-count for only about one quarter of the surveyed attack papers. By contrast, we found no defence papers addressing availability and, notably, none target-ing adversarial attacks, despite the later comprising roughly one third of the attack literature. This highlights critical gaps between existing attacks and available mitigations, leaving space for further research in the development of on-device inference protection mechanisms against known attacks. Overall, our findings indicate that securing on-device inference requires a shift from protections targeting mainly intellectual property to a more holis-tic approach that considers the special characteristics of on-device AI model deployment, such as physical exposure, heterogeneous setups, and hardware limitations. Moreover, appropriate defence designs are needed that jointly 51 optimise security, accuracy, and performance. Future research towards trust-worthy on-device AI systems can build on the present survey, which identifies significant mismatches between well-known attack vectors and underdevel-oped or missing mitigations. 

CRediT authorship contribution statement 

ZT: Conceptualization, Investigation, Resources, Writing - Origi-nal Draft, Visualization, Project administration; AF: Conceptualization, Methodology, Investigation, Writing - Original Draft, Visualization; GK: Validation, Investigation, Writing - Review & Editing, Supervision, Project administration; VK: Investigation, Writing - Original Draft; MA: Investiga-tion, Supervision. 

References 

[1] N. Farnaaz, M. Jabbar, Random forest modeling for network intrusion detection system, Procedia Computer Science 89 (2016) 213–217, twelfth International Conference on Communication Networks, ICCN 2016, August 19– 21, 2016, Bangalore, India Twelfth International Conference on Data Mining and Warehousing, ICDMW 2016, August 19-21, 2016, Bangalore, India Twelfth International Conference on Im-age and Signal Processing, ICISP 2016, August 19-21, 2016, Bangalore, India. doi:https://doi.org/10.1016/j.procs.2016.06.047 .URL https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/ S1877050916311127 

[2] D. Zhang, Y. Yu, J. Dong, C. Li, D. Su, C. Chu, D. Yu, Mm-llms: Recent advances in multimodal large language models (2024). arXiv: 2401.13601 .URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2401.13601 

[3] Y. Yao, J. Duan, K. Xu, Y. Cai, Z. Sun, Y. Zhang, A survey on large language model (llm) security and privacy: The good, the bad, and the ugly, High-Confidence Computing 4 (2) (2024) 100211. 

doi:https://doi.org/10.1016/j.hcc.2024.100211 .URL https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/ S266729522400014X 

52 [4] M. Estevez, M. T. Ballestar, J. Sainz, Market research and knowledge using generative ai: the power of large language mod-els, Journal of Innovation & Knowledge 10 (5) (2025) 100796. 

doi:https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jik.2025.100796 .URL https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/ S2444569X25001416 

[5] D. Adeboye, 12 best gpu cloud providers for ai/ml in 2025, 

https://northflank.com/blog/12-best-gpu-cloud-providers , ac-cessed: 2025-09-16 (July 2025). [6] A. Calder, S. Watkins, IT Governance: A Manager’s Guide to Data Security and ISO 27001 / ISO 27002, 4th Edition, Kogan Page Ltd., GBR, 2008. [7] ISO/IEC 27017:2015 — Information technology — Security tech-niques — Code of practice for information security controls based on ISO/IEC 27002 for cloud services, available from: https://www.iso. org/standard/43757.html (2015). [8] S. Zhu, H. Leung, X. Wang, J. Wei, H. Xu, When fintech meets pri-vacy: Securing financial llms with differential private fine-tuning (2025). 

arXiv:2509.08995 .URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2509.08995 

[9] C. F. Ruan, Y. Qin, X. Zhou, R. Lai, H. Jin, Y. Dong, B. Hou, M.-S. Yu, Y. Zhai, S. Agarwal, H. Cao, S. Feng, T. Chen, Webllm: A high-performance in-browser llm inference engine (2024). arXiv:2412.15803 .URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2412.15803 

[10] S. Heydari, Q. H. Mahmoud, Tiny machine learning and on-device infer-ence: A survey of applications, challenges, and future directions, Sensors 25 (10) (2025). doi:10.3390/s25103191 .URL https://www.mdpi.com/1424-8220/25/10/3191 

[11] W. Jiang, J. Yasmin, J. Jones, N. Synovic, J. Kuo, N. Bielanski, Y. Tian, G. K. Thiruvathukal, J. C. Davis, Peatmoss: A dataset and initial analy-sis of pre-trained models in open-source software, in: Proceedings of the 21st International Conference on Mining Software Repositories, MSR ’24, Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 2024, 53 p. 431–443. doi:10.1145/3643991.3644907 .URL https://doi.org/10.1145/3643991.3644907 

[12] D. Eynard, Wasm-agents: AI agents run-ning in your browser, https://blog.mozilla.ai/ wasm-agents-ai-agents-running-in-your-browser/ , accessed: YYYY-MM-DD (Jul. 3 2025). [13] M. Sabt, M. Achemlal, A. Bouabdallah, Trusted execution environ-ment: What it is, and what it is not, in: 2015 IEEE Trustcom/Big-DataSE/ISPA, Vol. 1, 2015, pp. 57–64. doi:10.1109/Trustcom.2015. 357 .[14] G. Kornaros, Hardware-assisted machine learning in resource-constrained iot environments for security: Review and future prospec-tive, IEEE Access 10 (2022) 58603–58622. doi:10.1109/ACCESS.2022. 3179047 .[15] O. Aouedi, T.-H. Vu, A. Sacco, D. C. Nguyen, K. Piamrat, G. Marchetto, Q.-V. Pham, A survey on intelligent internet of things: Applications, se-curity, privacy, and future directions, IEEE Communications Surveys & Tutorials 27 (2) (2025) 1238–1292. doi:10.1109/COMST.2024.3430368 .[16] X. Liu, B. Li, S. Chen, Z. Xu, A survey on multi-user privacy issues in edge intelligence: State of the art, challenges, and future directions, Electronics 14 (12) (2025). doi:10.3390/electronics14122401 .URL https://www.mdpi.com/2079-9292/14/12/2401 

[17] M. Mukherjee, R. Matam, C. X. Mavromoustakis, H. Jiang, G. Mas-torakis, M. Guo, Intelligent edge computing: Security and privacy chal-lenges, IEEE Communications Magazine 58 (9) (2020) 26–31. doi: 10.1109/MCOM.001.2000297 .[18] S. Dhar, J. Guo, J. J. Liu, S. Tripathi, U. Kurup, M. Shah, A sur-vey of on-device machine learning: An algorithms and learning the-ory perspective, ACM Trans. Internet Things 2 (3) (Jul. 2021). doi: 10.1145/3450494 .URL https://doi.org/10.1145/3450494 

[19] X. Wang, Z. Tang, J. Guo, T. Meng, C. Wang, T. Wang, W. Jia, Empow-ering edge intelligence: A comprehensive survey on on-device ai models, 54 ACM Computing Surveys 57 (9) (2025) 1–39. doi:10.1145/3724420 .URL http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/3724420 

[20] J. Huckelberry, Y. Zhang, A. Sansone, J. Mickens, P. A. Beerel, V. J. Reddi, Tinyml security: Exploring vulnerabilities in resource-constrained machine learning systems (2024). arXiv:2411.07114 .URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2411.07114 

[21] D. Xu, T. Li, Y. Li, X. Su, S. Tarkoma, T. Jiang, J. Crowcroft, P. Hui, Edge intelligence: Empowering intelligence to the edge of network, Pro-ceedings of the IEEE 109 (11) (2021) 1778–1837. doi:10.1109/JPROC. 2021.3119950 .[22] M. G. S. Murshed, C. Murphy, D. Hou, N. Khan, G. Ananthanarayanan, F. Hussain, Machine learning at the network edge: A survey, ACM Computing Surveys 54 (8) (2021) 1–37. doi:10.1145/3469029 .URL http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/3469029 

[23] S. Deng, H. Zhao, W. Fang, J. Yin, S. Dustdar, A. Y. Zomaya, Edge intelligence: The confluence of edge computing and artificial intelligence, IEEE Internet of Things Journal 7 (8) (2020) 7457–7469. doi:10.1109/ jiot.2020.2984887 .URL http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/JIOT.2020.2984887 

[24] Y. Shi, K. Yang, T. Jiang, J. Zhang, K. B. Letaief, Communication-efficient edge ai: Algorithms and systems (2020). arXiv:2002.09668 .URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2002.09668 

[25] J. Chen, X. Ran, Deep learning with edge computing: A review, Pro-ceedings of the IEEE 107 (8) (2019) 1655–1674. doi:10.1109/JPROC. 2019.2921977 .[26] B. Kitchenham, S. Charters, Guidelines for performing systematic liter-ature reviews in software engineering, Tech. Rep. EBSE-2007-01, Keele University and Durham University (2007). [27] D. Hyub Kim, J. O’Brien Weiss, S. Kundu, Extracting dnn architectures via runtime profiling on mobile gpus, IEEE Journal on Emerging and Selected Topics in Circuits and Systems 14 (4) (2024) 620–633. doi: 10.1109/JETCAS.2024.3488597 .55 [28] Y. Lee, S. Jun, Y. Cho, W. Han, H. Moon, Y. Paek, Precise extraction of deep learning models via side-channel attacks on edge/endpoint devices, in: European Symposium on Research in Computer Security, Springer, 2022, pp. 364–383. [29] T. Nayan, Q. Guo, M. A. Duniawi, M. Botacin, S. Uluagac, R. Sun, SoK: All you need to know about On-Device ML model extraction - the gap between research and practice, in: 33rd USENIX Security Symposium (USENIX Security 24), USENIX Association, Philadelphia, PA, 2024, pp. 5233–5250. URL https://www.usenix.org/conference/usenixsecurity24/ presentation/nayan 

[30] P. Ren, C. Zuo, X. Liu, W. Diao, Q. Zhao, S. Guo, Demistify: Iden-tifying on-device machine learning models stealing and reuse vulner-abilities in mobile apps, in: Proceedings of the IEEE/ACM 46th In-ternational Conference on Software Engineering, ICSE ’24, Associa-tion for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 2024. doi: 10.1145/3597503.3623325 .URL https://doi.org/10.1145/3597503.3623325 

[31] M. Li, Y. Li, H. Han, X. Ke, T. Wang, F. Xu, L. Fang, Redlc: Learning-driven reverse engineering for deep learning compilers, in: 2024 IEEE 35th International Symposium on Software Reliability Engineering (IS-SRE), 2024, pp. 204–215. doi:10.1109/ISSRE62328.2024.00029 .[32] M. Zhou, X. Gao, J. Wu, K. Liu, H. Sun, L. Li, Investigating white-box attacks for on-device models, in: Proceedings of the IEEE/ACM 46th International Conference on Software Engineering, ICSE ’24, As-sociation for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 2024. doi: 10.1145/3597503.3639144 .URL https://doi.org/10.1145/3597503.3639144 

[33] H. Wu, Y. Gong, X. Ke, H. Liang, F. Xu, Y. Liu, S. Zhong, Tim: Enabling large-scale white-box testing on in-app deep learning mod-els, IEEE Transactions on Information Forensics and Security 19 (2024) 8188–8203. doi:10.1109/TIFS.2024.3455761 .[34] H. Cao, S. Li, Y. Zhou, M. Fan, X. Zhao, Y. Tang, Cheating your apps: Black-box adversarial attacks on deep learning apps, Journal 56 of Software: Evolution and Process 36 (4) (2024) e2528. arXiv: https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/pdf/10.1002/smr.2528 ,

doi:https://doi.org/10.1002/smr.2528 .URL https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/abs/10.1002/smr. 2528 

[35] G. Xu, H. Shao, J. Cui, H. Bai, J. Li, G. Bai, S. Liu, W. Meng, X. Zheng, Gendroid: A query-efficient black-box android adversar-ial attack framework, Computers & Security 132 (2023) 103359. 

doi:https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cose.2023.103359 .URL https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/ S0167404823002699 

[36] Y. Huang, C. Chen, Smart app attack: Hacking deep learning models in android apps, IEEE Transactions on Information Forensics and Security 17 (2022) 1827–1840. doi:10.1109/TIFS.2022.3172213 .[37] Y. Huang, H. Hu, C. Chen, Robustness of on-device models: Adversarial attack to deep learning models on android apps (2021). arXiv:2101. 04401 .URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2101.04401 

[38] H. Cao, S. Li, Y. Zhou, M. Fan, X. Zhao, Y. Tang, Towards black-box attacks on deep learning apps (2021). arXiv:2107.12732 .URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2107.12732 

[39] K. Chen, D. Zhang, S. Guan, B. Mi, J. Shen, G. Wang, Private data leakage in federated human activity recognition for wearable healthcare devices, arXiv preprint arXiv:2405.10979 (2024). [40] X. Dong, H. Yin, J. M. Alvarez, J. Kautz, P. Molchanov, H. Kung, Privacy vulnerability of split computing to data-free model inversion attacks, arXiv preprint arXiv:2107.06304 (2021). [41] Y. Sang, Y. Huang, S. Huang, H. Cui, Beyond the model: Data pre-processing attack to deep learning models in android apps, in: Proceed-ings of the 2023 Secure and Trustworthy Deep Learning Systems Work-shop, SecTL ’23, Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 2023. doi:10.1145/3591197.3591308 .URL https://doi.org/10.1145/3591197.3591308 

57 [42] Y. Li, J. Hua, H. Wang, C. Chen, Y. Liu, Deeppayload: Black-box back-door attack on deep learning models through neural payload injection, in: 2021 IEEE/ACM 43rd International Conference on Software En-gineering (ICSE), 2021, pp. 263–274. doi:10.1109/ICSE43902.2021. 00035 .[43] Z. Wang, S. Huang, Y. Huang, H. Cui, Energy-latency attacks to on-device neural networks via sponge poisoning, in: Proceedings of the 2023 Secure and Trustworthy Deep Learning Systems Workshop, SecTL ’23, Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 2023. 

doi:10.1145/3591197.3591307 .URL https://doi.org/10.1145/3591197.3591307 

[44] Y. Sun, G. Xiong, J. Liu, Z. Liu, J. Cui, TSQP: Safeguarding Real-Time Inference for Quantization Neural Networks on Edge Devices , in: 2025 IEEE Symposium on Security and Privacy (SP), IEEE Computer Society, Los Alamitos, CA, USA, 2025, pp. 2114–2132. 

doi:10.1109/SP61157.2025.00001 .URL https://doi.ieeecomputersociety.org/10.1109/SP61157. 2025.00001 

[45] R. Ding, T. Xu, A. A. Ding, Y. Fei, Graph in the vault: Protecting edge gnn inference with trusted execution environment (2025). arXiv: 2502.15012 .URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2502.15012 

[46] Z. Liu, T. Zhou, Y. Luo, X. Xu, Tbnet: A neural architectural defense framework facilitating dnn model protection in trusted execution envi-ronments (2024). arXiv:2405.03974 .URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2405.03974 

[47] D. Li, Z. Zhang, M. Yao, Y. Cai, Y. Guo, X. Chen, Teeslice: Pro-tecting sensitive neural network models in trusted execution environ-ments when attackers have pre-trained models, ACM Trans. Softw. Eng. Methodol.Just Accepted (Dec. 2024). doi:10.1145/3707453 .URL https://doi.org/10.1145/3707453 

[48] M. Yang, W. Yi, J. Wang, H. Hu, X. Xu, Z. Li, Penetralium: Privacy-preserving and memory-efficient neural network inference at the edge, Future Generation Computer Systems 156 (2024) 30–41. 58 doi:https://doi.org/10.1016/j.future.2024.03.008 .URL https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/ S0167739X24000797 

[49] Z. Zhu, Z. Qu, N. Jia, W. Zhou, B. Ye, Enhancing on-device inference se-curity through tee-integrated dual-network architecture, in: 2024 IEEE International Conference on Systems, Man, and Cybernetics (SMC), 2024, pp. 247–254. doi:10.1109/SMC54092.2024.10831158 .[50] Z. Liu, Y. Luo., S. Duan, T. Zhou, X. Xu, Mirrornet: A tee-friendly framework for secure on-device dnn inference, in: 2023 IEEE/ACM In-ternational Conference on Computer Aided Design (ICCAD), 2023, pp. 1–9. doi:10.1109/ICCAD57390.2023.10323746 .[51] L. Sun, S. Wang, H. Wu, Y. Gong, F. Xu, Y. Liu, H. Han, S. Zhong, Leap: Trustzone based developer-friendly tee for intelligent mobile apps, IEEE Transactions on Mobile Computing 22 (12) (2023) 7138–7155. 

doi:10.1109/TMC.2022.3207745 .[52] M. Costa, T. Gomes, J. Cabral, J. Monteiro, A. Tavares, S. Pinto, Secureqnn: Introducing a privacy-preserving framework for qnns at the deep edge, in: C. Anutariya, M. M. Bonsangue (Eds.), Data Sci-ence and Artificial Intelligence, Springer Nature Singapore, Singapore, 2023, pp. 3–17. [53] Z. Zhang, C. Gong, Y. Cai, Y. Yuan, B. Liu, D. Li, Y. Guo, X. Chen, No privacy left outside: On the (in-)security of tee-shielded dnn partition for on-device ml (2023). arXiv:2310.07152 .URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2310.07152 

[54] M. S. Islam, M. Zamani, C. H. Kim, L. Khan, K. W. Hamlen, Confi-dential execution of deep learning inference at the untrusted edge with arm trustzone, in: Proceedings of the Thirteenth ACM Conference on Data and Application Security and Privacy, CODASPY ’23, Associa-tion for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 2023, p. 153–164. 

doi:10.1145/3577923.3583648 .URL https://doi.org/10.1145/3577923.3583648 

[55] Z. Sun, R. Sun, C. Liu, A. R. Chowdhury, L. Lu, S. Jha, Shadownet: A secure and efficient on-device model inference system for convolutional 59 neural networks (2023). arXiv:2011.05905 .URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2011.05905 

[56] A. Gangal, M. Ye, S. Wei, Hybridtee: Secure mobile dnn execution using hybrid trusted execution environment, in: 2020 Asian Hardware Oriented Security and Trust Symposium (AsianHOST), 2020, pp. 1–6. 

doi:10.1109/AsianHOST51057.2020.9358260 .[57] F. Mo, A. S. Shamsabadi, K. Katevas, S. Demetriou, I. Leontiadis, A. Cavallaro, H. Haddadi, Darknetz: towards model privacy at the edge using trusted execution environments, in: Proceedings of the 18th In-ternational Conference on Mobile Systems, Applications, and Services, MobiSys ’20, ACM, 2020, p. 161–174. doi:10.1145/3386901.3388946 .URL http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/3386901.3388946 

[58] P. M. VanNostrand, I. Kyriazis, M. Cheng, T. Guo, R. J. Walls, Con-fidential deep learning: Executing proprietary models on untrusted de-vices (2019). arXiv:1908.10730 .URL https://arxiv.org/abs/1908.10730 

[59] B. Jacob, S. Kligys, B. Chen, M. Zhu, M. Tang, A. G. Howard, H. Adam, D. Kalenichenko, Quantization and training of neural networks for ef-ficient integer-arithmetic-only inference, CoRR abs/1712.05877 (2017). 

arXiv:1712.05877 .URL http://arxiv.org/abs/1712.05877 

[60] Z. Zhang, L. K. L. Ng, B. Liu, Y. Cai, D. Li, Y. Guo, X. Chen, Teeslice: slicing dnn models for secure and efficient deployment, in: Proceed-ings of the 2nd ACM International Workshop on AI and Software Test-ing/Analysis, AISTA 2022, Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 2022, p. 1–8. doi:10.1145/3536168.3543299 .URL https://doi.org/10.1145/3536168.3543299 

[61] P. Li, J. Huang, Y. Peng, S. Zhang, A novel access control and privacy-enhancing approach for models in edge computing, in: 2025 IEEE Wire-less Communications and Networking Conference (WCNC), 2025, pp. 1–6. doi:10.1109/WCNC61545.2025.10978383 .[62] V.-E. Baciu, A. Braeken, L. Segers, B. d. Silva, Secure tiny machine learning on edge devices: A lightweight dual attestation mechanism 60 for machine learning, Future Internet 17 (2) (2025). doi:10.3390/ fi17020085 .URL https://www.mdpi.com/1999-5903/17/2/85 

[63] M. Jabbeen, V. Kumar, R. Sen, Iotcloak: Practical integrity checks of machine learning inference code and models on tiny iot devices, in: Pro-ceedings of the 2nd International Workshop on Security and Privacy of Sensing Systems, Sensors S&P ’25, Association for Computing Ma-chinery, New York, NY, USA, 2025, p. 17–21. doi:10.1145/3722566. 3727630 .URL https://doi.org/10.1145/3722566.3727630 

[64] Q. Li, Y. Xie, T. Du, Z. Shen, Z. Qin, H. Peng, X. Zhao, X. Zhu, J. Yin, X. Zhang, Coreguard: Safeguarding foundational capabilities of llms against model stealing in edge deployment (2024). arXiv:2410.13903 .URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2410.13903 

[65] J. Chen, H. Zheng, T. Liu, J. Liu, Y. Cheng, X. Zhang, S. Ji, Edgepro: Edge deep learning model protection via neuron authorization, IEEE Transactions on Dependable and Secure Computing 21 (5) (2024) 4967– 4981. doi:10.1109/TDSC.2024.3365730 .[66] Q. Li, Z. Shen, Z. Qin, Y. Xie, X. Zhang, T. Du, S. Cheng, X. Wang, J. Yin, Translinkguard: Safeguarding transformer models against model stealing in edge deployment, in: Proceedings of the 32nd ACM Interna-tional Conference on Multimedia, MM ’24, ACM, 2024, p. 3479–3488. 

doi:10.1145/3664647.3680786 .URL http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/3664647.3680786 

[67] Z. Sun, R. Sun, L. Lu, A. Mislove, Mind your weight(s): A large-scale study on insufficient machine learning model protection in mobile apps, in: 30th USENIX Security Symposium (USENIX Security 21), USENIX Association, 2021, pp. 1955–1972. URL https://www.usenix.org/conference/usenixsecurity21/ presentation/sun-zhichuang 

[68] Q. Zhang, H. Zhong, W. Shi, L. Liu, A trusted and collaborative framework for deep learning in iot, Computer Networks 193 (2021) 108055. doi:https://doi.org/10.1016/j.comnet.2021.108055 .61 URL https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/ S1389128621001523 

[69] Z. Zhang, N. Wang, Z. Zhang, Y. Zhang, T. Zhang, J. Liu, Y. Wu, Groupcover: A secure, efficient and scalable inference framework for on-device model protection based on TEEs, in: Forty-first International Conference on Machine Learning, 2024. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=4mU6LNMaIu 

[70] C.-Y. Yang, G. Ramshankar, N. Eliopoulos, P. Jajal, S. Nambiar, E. Miller, X. Zhang, D. J. Tian, S.-H. Chen, C.-F. Perng, Y.-H. Lu, Securing deep neural networks on edge from membership inference at-tacks using trusted execution environments, in: Proceedings of the 29th ACM/IEEE International Symposium on Low Power Electronics and Design, ISLPED ’24, Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 2024, p. 1–6. doi:10.1145/3665314.3670821 .URL https://doi.org/10.1145/3665314.3670821 

[71] H. Yang, D. Zhang, Y. Zhao, Y. Li, Y. Liu, A first look at efficient and secure on-device llm inference against kv leakage, in: Proceedings of the 19th Workshop on Mobility in the Evolving Internet Architecture, MobiArch ’24, Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 2024, p. 13–18. doi:10.1145/3691555.3696827 .URL https://doi.org/10.1145/3691555.3696827 

[72] M. Zhou, X. Gao, P. Liu, J. Grundy, C. Chen, X. Chen, L. Li, Model-less is the best model: Generating pure code implementations to replace on-device dl models (2024). arXiv:2403.16479 .URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2403.16479 

[73] M. Zhou, X. Gao, X. Chen, C. Chen, J. Grundy, L. Li, Dynamo: Protecting mobile dl models through coupling obfuscated dl operators, in: Proceedings of the 39th IEEE/ACM International Conference on Automated Software Engineering, ASE ’24, ACM, 2024, p. 204–215. 

doi:10.1145/3691620.3694998 .URL http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/3691620.3694998 

[74] M. Zhou, X. Gao, J. Wu, J. Grundy, X. Chen, C. Chen, L. Li, Modelob-fuscator: Obfuscating model information to protect deployed ml-based systems, in: Proceedings of the 32nd ACM SIGSOFT International 62 Symposium on Software Testing and Analysis, ISSTA 2023, Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 2023, p. 1005–1017. 

doi:10.1145/3597926.3598113 .URL https://doi.org/10.1145/3597926.3598113 

[75] J. Hou, H. Liu, Y. Liu, Y. Wang, P.-J. Wan, X.-Y. Li, Model protection: Real-time privacy-preserving inference service for model privacy at the edge, IEEE Transactions on Dependable and Secure Computing 19 (6) (2022) 4270–4284. doi:10.1109/TDSC.2021.3126315 .[76] J. Hua, Y. Li, H. Wang, Mmguard: Automatically protecting on-device deep learning models in android apps, in: 2021 IEEE Security and Privacy Workshops (SPW), 2021, pp. 71–77. doi:10.1109/SPW53761. 2021.00019 .[77] Z. Jian, X. Liu, Q. Dong, L. Cheng, X. Xie, T. Li, Smartzone: Runtime support for secure and efficient on-device inference on arm trustzone, IEEE Transactions on Computers (2025) 1–17 doi:10.1109/TC.2025. 3557971 .[78] X. Xie, H. Wang, Z. Jian, T. Li, W. Wang, Z. Xu, G. Wang, Memory-efficient and secure dnn inference on trustzone-enabled consumer iot devices (2024). arXiv:2403.12568 .URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2403.12568 

[79] B. Hu, Y. Wang, J. Cheng, T. Zhao, Y. Xie, X. Guo, Y. Chen, Se-cure and efficient mobile dnn using trusted execution environments, in: Proceedings of the 2023 ACM Asia Conference on Computer and Com-munications Security, ASIA CCS ’23, Association for Computing Ma-chinery, New York, NY, USA, 2023, p. 274–285. doi:10.1145/3579856. 3582820 .URL https://doi.org/10.1145/3579856.3582820 

[80] J. Choi, J. Kim, C. Lim, S. Lee, J. Lee, D. Song, Y. Kim, Guardiann: Fast and secure on-device inference in trustzone using embedded sram and cryptographic hardware, in: Proceedings of the 23rd ACM/IFIP International Middleware Conference, Middleware ’22, Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 2022, p. 15–28. doi:10. 1145/3528535.3531513 .URL https://doi.org/10.1145/3528535.3531513 

63 [81] R. Liu, L. Garcia, Z. Liu, B. Ou, M. Srivastava, Secdeep: Secure and performant on-device deep learning inference framework for mo-bile and iot devices, in: Proceedings of the International Conference on Internet-of-Things Design and Implementation, IoTDI ’21, Associa-tion for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 2021, p. 67–79. 

doi:10.1145/3450268.3453524 .URL https://doi.org/10.1145/3450268.3453524 

[82] S. P. Bayerl, T. Frassetto, P. Jauernig, K. Riedhammer, A.-R. Sadeghi, T. Schneider, E. Stapf, C. Weinert, Offline model guard: Secure and private ml on mobile devices, in: 2020 Design, Automation & Test in Europe Conference & Exhibition (DATE), IEEE, 2020, p. 460–465. doi: 10.23919/date48585.2020.9116560 .URL http://dx.doi.org/10.23919/DATE48585.2020.9116560 

[83] F. Brasser, D. Gens, P. Jauernig, A.-R. Sadeghi, E. Stapf, Sanctuary: Arming trustzone with user-space enclaves, Proceedings 2019 Network and Distributed System Security Symposium (2019). URL https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:86835387 

[84] S. Abdollahi, M. Maheri, S. Siby, M. Kogias, H. Haddadi, An early experience with confidential computing architecture for on-device model protection (2025). arXiv:2504.08508 .URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2504.08508 

[85] M. Moon, M. Kim, J. Jung, D. Song, Asgard: Protecting on-device deep neural networks with virtualization-based trusted execution envi-ronments. [86] Y. Wang, V. S. Ramya Padmasri Boggaram, Towards protecting on-device machine learning with risc-v based multi-enclave tee, in: 2024 33rd International Conference on Computer Communications and Net-works (ICCCN), 2024, pp. 1–6. doi:10.1109/ICCCN61486.2024. 10637594 .[87] A. Bertschi, S. Sridhara, F. Groschupp, M. Kuhne, B. Schlüter, C. Thorens, N. Dutly, S. Capkun, S. Shinde, Devlore: Extending arm cca to integrated devices a journey beyond memory to interrupt isola-tion (2024). arXiv:2408.05835 .URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2408.05835 

64 [88] S. Siby, S. Abdollahi, M. Maheri, M. Kogias, H. Haddadi, Guarantee: Towards attestable and private ml with cca, in: Proceedings of the 4th Workshop on Machine Learning and Systems, EuroMLSys ’24, Asso-ciation for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 2024, p. 1–9. 

doi:10.1145/3642970.3655845 .URL https://doi.org/10.1145/3642970.3655845 

[89] Y. Deng, C. Wang, S. Yu, S. Liu, Z. Ning, K. Leach, J. Li, S. Yan, Z. He, J. Cao, F. Zhang, Strongbox: A gpu tee on arm endpoints, in: Proceed-ings of the 2022 ACM SIGSAC Conference on Computer and Communi-cations Security, CCS ’22, Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 2022, p. 769–783. doi:10.1145/3548606.3560627 .URL https://doi.org/10.1145/3548606.3560627 

[90] M. S. Rahman, I. Khalil, M. Atiquzzaman, X. Yi, To-wards privacy preserving ai based composition framework in edge networks using fully homomorphic encryption, Engineer-ing Applications of Artificial Intelligence 94 (2020) 103737. 

doi:https://doi.org/10.1016/j.engappai.2020.103737 .URL https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/ S0952197620301512 

[91] European Parliament and Council, Regulation (EU) 2024/2847 on hor-izontal cybersecurity requirements for products with digital elements (Cyber Resilience Act), adopted 23 Oct 2024, entered into force 10 Dec 2024 (2024). URL http://europa.eu 

[92] European Parliament and Council, Regulation (EU) 2016/679 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 27 April 2016 on the protection of natural persons with regard to the processing of personal data and on the free movement of such data, and repealing Directive 95/46/EC (General Data Protection Regulation), Official Journal of the European Union, L 119, pp. 1–88 (Apr. 2016). URL https://eur-lex.europa.eu/legal-content/EN/TXT/HTML/ ?uri=OJ:L:2016:119:FULL&from=EN 

[93] European Parliament, Council of the European Union, Regulation (eu) 2024/1689 of the european parliament and of the council of 13 june 65 2024..., Official Journal of the European Union L 2024/1689 (2024). URL http://data.europa.eu/eli/reg/2024/1689/oj 

[94] OpenAI, Whisper Tiny — openai, https://huggingface.co/openai/ whisper-tiny , accessed: 2026-02-17 (2023). [95] J. Lin, C. Gan, S. Han, Defensive quantization: When efficiency meets robustness, in: International Conference on Learning Representations, International Conference on Learning Representations, ICLR, 2019. [96] D. Brown, M. Mazeika, How does llm compression affect weight exfil-tration attacks?, in: Workshop on Socially Responsible Language Mod-elling Research, 2024. [97] H. Cai, J. Lin, Y. Lin, Z. Liu, H. Tang, H. Wang, L. Zhu, S. Han, Enable deep learning on mobile devices: Methods, systems, and applications, ACM Transactions on Design Automation of Electronic Systems 27 (3) (2022) 1–50. doi:10.1145/3486618 .URL http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/3486618 

[98] H. Benmeziane, K. E. Maghraoui, H. Ouarnoughi, S. Niar, M. Wistuba, N. Wang, A comprehensive survey on hardware-aware neural architec-ture search, arXiv preprint arXiv:2101.09336 (2021). 66