Title: Correcting Sensor-Induced Distribution Drift with Wasserstein Adversarial Learning

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2606.18561v1

Published Time: Thu, 18 Jun 2026 00:18:54 GMT

Number of Pages: 10

Markdown Content:
NUCLEAR SCIENCE AND TECHNIQUES , () 

## Correcting Sensor-Induced Distribution Drift with Wasserstein Adversarial Learning 

Saraa Ali, 1, ∗ Vladimir Bocharnikov, 1 Fedor Ratnikov, 1 Mikhail Hushchyn, 1 Artem Ryzhikov, 1 and Denis Derkach 1

> 1

Laboratory of Methods for Big Data Analysis, HSE University, Pokrovsky Boulevard 11, Moscow 109028, Russia 

The quality of recorded data depends on the stability of the sensor system that acquires it. Sensor motion and aging can degrade the performance and stability of downstream data-driven methods. We present a Wasserstein-GAN-inspired approach for unsupervised inference of physically interpretable transformation parameters that map a changed detector response distribution back to a nominal reference distribution. In contrast to standard generative modeling, the generator is used as a learnable calibration transformation whose trainable weights represent the sought parameters, while the critic provides a distributional distance signal via the Wasserstein objective. We validate the approach on a tracking-detector toy model with controlled layer shifts and demon-strate its application on high-granularity Geant4-simulated calorimeter data with cell-wise aging effects. The method recovers aging coefficients for individual cells with correlation to ground truth and improves agreement between calibrated and reference energy-sum distributions, while exhibiting the expected degradation at increas-ing channel-to-channel noise levels. These results indicate that adversarial distribution matching can serve as a data-driven component of calibration strategies in settings where direct labels for degradation parameters are unavailable. 

> Keywords: Machine Learning, Deep Learning, Generative Adversarial Neural Networks, Calibration, High Energy Physics

I. INTRODUCTION 

The integrity of any data-driven analysis pipeline depends on the quality and stability of the measurements provided by the underlying sensor system [1]. In experimental envi-ronments, sensor responses are rarely stationary: mechanical drifts, environmental conditions, and long term material ag-ing can introduce systematic distortions that accumulate over time [2]. Even when these effects are small at the level of individual channels, they can propagate to downstream re-construction and inference, leading to degraded resolution, biased estimates, or reduced robustness of machine-learning-based decision systems [3]. Modern detectors [4] operate over long time scales and un-der intense radiation exposure [5–7], and their response must be continuously monitored and corrected to preserve the fi-delity of physics measurements [6–8]. Calibration [6, 8, 9] and alignment [9, 10] procedures are therefore a core part of detector operations. However, comprehensive recalibration may be resource-intensive and is not always feasible at the frequency that changing detector conditions would ideally re-quire [8, 11, 12]. A key difficulty is that the parameters gov-erning detector degradation are often not directly observable. In many realistic scenarios, one has access to data recorded under nominal (reference) conditions and data recorded under changed conditions, but lacks event-level correspondences or labeled degradation targets [13, 14]. This motivates ap-proaches that infer detector-change parameters by exploiting distributional differences between datasets rather than relying on supervised targets or explicit likelihood models [15, 16]. From a machine learning perspective, such non-stationarities correspond to distribution shift [17], also referred to as dataset shift or domain shift, where the data-generating distribution differs between two conditions. While drift monitoring is typically formalized as a decision problem  

> ∗Corresponding authorthraaali@hse.ru

(i.e., whether and when drift occurs), detector systems require estimating the underlying, physically meaningful transformation parameters responsible for the shift (e.g., alignment offsets, attenuation coefficients, or calibration constants) [9, 10, 18]. In detector systems, the objective is not merely to flag a change but to infer interpretable parameters that can be used to correct the data [6, 9, 11]. In this work, we propose a novel interpretable calibra-tion approach to tackle sensor degradation as a distribution-matching problem [19]. We introduce a Wasserstein-inspired adversarial parameter-search framework [20] for unsuper-vised recovery of interpretable detector degradation param-eters from distribution shift, and demonstrate it on a tracker misalignment toy model and a calorimeter aging task. 2 We thus position detector calibration and alignment within a broader class of distribution-shift and distribution-alignment problems. The proposed method is formulated and tested in an offline setting, however, it can in principle be adapted to online calibration scenarios. 

II. BACKGROUND A. HEP detector systems: tracking alignment and calorimeter aging 

Modern high energy physics (HEP) experiments rely on large scale, high-granularity detector systems designed to reconstruct particle trajectories and measure their energies with high precision. These detectors are typically composed of multiple sub systems, including tracking detectors and calorimeters, each optimized for specific measurement tasks.           

> 2The implementation used in this work is publicly available at https://github.com/tharaaali/ wasserstein-parameter-recovery .

-1 

> arXiv:2606.18561v1 [cs.LG] 17 Jun 2026

Saraa Ali et al. Nucl. Sci. Tech. , () 

a. Tracking Detectors and Alignment Tracking detec-tors infer charged-particle trajectories from spatial hit mea-surements recorded in many individual sensor elements. Pre-cise reconstruction requires that the relative positions and ori-entations of these elements are known in a global reference frame: even when the intrinsic hit resolution is at the level of tens of microns, construction and assembly uncertainties can be much larger and can bias fitted track parameters if un-corrected [10, 21]. In this context, misalignment is the dif-ference between the true installed detector geometry and the assumed geometry used in reconstruction, and it can system-atically bias reconstructed track parameters through biased hit positions in the fit [22]. 

b. Calorimeters, Aging, and Calibration While track-ing detectors measure charged-particle trajectories, calorime-ters measure particle energy through total absorption [23– 27]. A calorimeter is segmented into cells, each producing a signal proportional to deposited energy. Accurate energy reconstruction requires uniform response across all cells. In an ideal detector, identical particles impinging on different cells should produce identical signals at large statistics. In practice, several effects break this uniformity [23, 24]. Man-ufacturing tolerances, electronic variations, temperature fluc-tuations, and radiation damage introduce cell to cell response variations. Over time, radiation exposure leads to material degradation and signal attenuation—commonly referred to as detector aging. Calibration [23, 24] procedures aim to restore uniformity by determining correction coefficients for each channel. Calibration is typically established using a combina-tion of hardware procedures (e.g., electronic pulse injection, laser or radioactive sources), test beam measurements, and in-situ physics constraints from well understood processes [23, 24]. Over time, calorimeter response can drift due to aging and radiation damage in active materials and readout components, altering cell wise gains or attenuation and ne-cessitating periodic recalibration to maintain uniformity and energy scale stability [23]. Because the detector comprises many channels, maintaining calibration becomes a large scale parameter estimation problem, where physically meaningful parameters (e.g., per-cell response coefficients) must be up-dated from data under realistic constraints on dedicated cali-bration time and resources [23, 24].  

> B. Applications of Generative Machine Learning Models in High Energy Physics

Deep generative models have become a central component of modern machine-learning toolkits for HEP because they can learn high-dimensional detector- and event-level distri-butions and provide efficient sampling procedures [28]. Amajor driver is fast detector simulation: surrogate generative models can approximate the output of computationally expen-sive Monte Carlo pipelines while retaining statistical features needed for downstream analyses [28, 29]. At the same time, high fidelity deployment requires careful validation and un-certainty treatment, since mismodeling can bias physics con-clusions even when one dimensional projections look reason-able [30]. Recent reviews organize state of the art surrogate models by architecture [31] class, including GAN based models [32], variational autoencoders (VAEs), normalizing flows [33], diffusion/score-based models [34], and their hybrids, as well as by the data representation and conditioning strategy used in different detectors and benchmarks [28]. In prac-tice, GANs have been widely explored for calorimeter and detector-response emulation, with substantial gains in genera-tion speed compared to traditional simulation chains [29, 35– 39]. However, their use also raises questions of statistical fidelity and uncertainty propagation, motivating rigorous val-idation protocols [30]. Generative models are also used as components of analysis workflows, especially in weakly supervised and unsupervised settings. Autoencoder-based approaches, including condi-tional VAEs [40], have been studied for anomaly detection at the LHC [41], where deviations from the learned manifold may indicate rare or unexpected processes. More broadly, generative modeling can support model-independent searches and background modeling under limited supervision [28]. Beyond event generation and simulation acceleration, GANs have also been explored as tools for detector calibra-tion and parameter tuning. In this context, the adversarial ob-jective is used not to generate new samples, but to enforce consistency between observed data distributions and refer-ence expectations [42, 43]. Related ideas have been investi-gated using likelihood-based methods and supervised neural networks for parameter estimation, including generator tun-ing and detector-response modeling [44, 45]. Track-based alignment provides a classical example of large-scale parame-ter inference in HEP, where geometric constants are extracted from reconstructed tracks through iterative optimization and must address scalability and parameter degeneracies [46–48]. This motivates distribution level strategies [49] for param-eter inference that do not require event level correspondences. Adversarial objectives, and in particular Wasserstein-based critics, provide a practical way to quantify and minimize mismatch between high dimensional distributions [50, 51]. In this work, we adopt this perspective by using a deter-ministic transformation with trainable weights correspond-ing to calibration or alignment parameters, optimized using a distribution-matching objective.  

> C. Generative Adversarial Networks

A GAN is composed of two components trained simulta-neously: a generator G, which produces samples intended to resemble data drawn from a target distribution, and a discrim-inator D, which evaluates whether a given sample originates from the true data distribution or from the generator. Rather than relying on an explicit likelihood, GANs learn by enforc-ing statistical indistinguishability between generated and real samples [32]. During training, the generator maps latent variables z, sam-pled from a predefined distribution pz (z), to synthetic sam-ples G(z). The discriminator receives either real samples -2 CORRECTING SENSOR-INDUCED . . . Nucl. Sci. Tech. , () 

x ∼ pdata (x) or generated samples G(z) and outputs a scalar score reflecting its confidence in the sample’s authenticity. The two networks are optimized in opposition: the discrimi-nator improves its ability to separate real and generated data, while the generator adapts to produce samples that are in-creasingly difficult to distinguish. This adversarial interaction is commonly formulated as a minimax optimization problem [32]: 

min  

> G

max  

> D

Ex∼pdata (x)[log D(x)]+ Ez∼pz (z)[log(1 −D(G(z)))] ,

(1) where the equilibrium corresponds to the generator reproduc-ing the target data distribution. Although this formulation has proven effective in many applications, it is known to suffer from optimization instabilities and sensitivity to model design and hyperparameters, particularly when the real and gener-ated distributions have limited overlap [20]. The Wasserstein GAN (WGAN) is proposed to address the optimization challenges inherent to the original GAN formu-lation by replacing the discriminator-based divergence with a distance metric grounded in optimal transport theory [20]. Instead of estimating a probability of authenticity, the dis-criminator is reformulated as a critic C, which assigns real-valued scores to samples. The difference between expected critic scores for real and generated data provides an estimate of the Wasserstein-1 (Earth Mover’s) distance between their distributions. The WGAN objective is given by 

min  

> G

max  

> C∈C

Ex∼pdata (x)[C(x)] − Ez∼pz (z)[C(G(z))] , (2) where C denotes the set of 1-Lipschitz functions. Enforcing this constraint is essential for the validity of the Wasserstein distance and is commonly achieved through techniques such as weight clipping [20], gradient penalty regularization [51], or spectral normalization [52]. By providing more informative gradients and a loss func-tion that correlates with distributional mismatch, WGAN im-proves training stability and robustness compared to the origi-nal GAN framework [20]. Importantly, the critic output offers a meaningful quantitative measure of how far two distribu-tions are from one another, making WGAN a natural choice for problems centered on distribution alignment rather than explicit sample generation.  

> D. Alignment and calibration as distribution matching parameter inference

Tracking alignment and calorimeter calibration share the same mathematical structure: unknown physical parameters (geometric shifts or response coefficients) must be inferred from data, while only indirect observables (hit positions or energy deposits) are accessible. In tracking, misalignment alters the spatial distribution of residuals and reconstructed track parameters [46, 47]. In calorimetry, imperfect equaliza-tion and long term detector aging modify the statistical dis-tribution of energy deposits and shower shapes, motivating periodic calibration and monitoring to preserve the stability of reconstructed energies [23]. In both cases, detector deformations induce a distributional shift between a nominal (reference) dataset and a distorted (changed/damaged) dataset. Traditional procedures often rely on explicit residual-based objectives [46, 53], or on exter-nal reference signals and well controlled physics samples for calorimeter calibration [23]. This motivates complementary approaches that operate directly at the level of data distri-butions: instead of minimizing residuals event-by-event, one may infer the underlying physical parameters by matching the full high-dimensional distribution of observables between a reference and a shifted dataset. While Wasserstein GANs (WGANs) are most often em-ployed for synthetic data generation, their formulation as a distribution matching framework enables alternative modes of use beyond sample synthesis [20]. In particular, the gen-erator can be used as a deterministic transformation whose trainable weights represent transformation parameters ap-plied to observed data [13, 14]. In this setting, the adver-sarial objective enforces agreement between transformed and reference distributions, and the learned parameters implic-itly capture the systematic effects responsible for their mis-match. This perspective is especially relevant for detector studies, where effects such as response changes due to ra-diation exposure and aging [23], as well as geometric mis-alignment [46, 47], manifest as structured changes in mea-sured data distributions [44, 45]. By minimizing the Wasser-stein distance between transformed and nominal detector re-sponses, the WGAN framework enables unsupervised infer-ence of physically interpretable parameters without requiring labeled data or explicit likelihood models. In the present work, we adopt this paradigm by embedding detector-related parameters within the generator and using the critic exclusively as a distributional consistency measure. This shifts the role of adversarial learning from data synthe-sis to parameter recovery, providing a flexible and scalable approach for data-driven detector calibration and alignment studies.  

> III. METHOD AND ARCHITECTURE

We propose a data-driven framework for inferring phys-ically interpretable parameters that characterize systematic changes between two data taking regimes. The method is de-signed for scenarios in which a reference dataset, correspond-ing to an undamaged or nominal detector state, is available alongside a second dataset exhibiting distortions induced by aging, misalignment, or other systematic effects. Rather than explicitly modeling these effects through parametric likeli-hoods, we formulate the problem as one of distribution align-ment and parameter recovery. To achieve this aim, we adopt the adversarial training principle but reinterpret the role of the generator: instead of producing new data samples, it consists of a parameterized transformation applied directly to exist-ing data, the transformation parameters are treated as train-able model variables. From a conventional perspective, the -3 Saraa Ali et al. Nucl. Sci. Tech. , () task of the generator is to correct the damaged detector re-sponses. Specifically, we consider two distributions: a ref-erence distribution pref , representing undamaged or nominal detector responses, and a target distribution pchg , correspond-ing to damaged or systematically altered data. A determin-istic transformation Tθ (·), parameterized by θ, is applied to samples drawn from one of the distributions. The objective is to adjust θ such that the transformed distribution aligns sta-tistically with the opposing distribution. Depending on the chosen formulation, this corresponds to matching Tθ (pchg )

to pref , or equivalently matching pchg to Tθ (pref ).Inspired by the WGAN algorithm, a critic network is em-ployed to quantify the discrepancy between the transformed and target distributions. By minimizing the Wasserstein dis-tance estimate, the model directly optimizes the transforma-tion parameters that best explain the observed distributional shift. This yields a stable optimization procedure and a scalar objective that correlates with distributional mismatch. Fig. 1 illustrates the overall architecture. While implemen-tation details vary between applications, the core components a parameterized transformation, an adversarial critic, and a Wasserstein based objective remain unchanged throughout this work.  

> A. Operational principle

The method operates by iteratively updating the transfor-mation parameters θ to minimize the discrepancy between transformed and reference data distributions. At each train-ing step, minibatches of samples are drawn from the refer-ence and changed datasets. The transformation Tθ is applied to a set of samples, and the critic evaluates both transformed and untransformed samples to estimate the Wasserstein dis-tance between their distributions. The transformation param-eters are optimized to minimize this distance, thereby driv-ing the transformed distribution toward statistical consistency with the reference. Importantly, no direct supervision on θ is required, and no explicit correspondence between individual samples in the two datasets is assumed. The inferred param-eters are learned from population-level distributional agree-ment. This adversarial parameter-search framework is sym-metric by construction. Depending on the direction of the ap-plied transformation, it can be used either to recover undam-aged detector responses from altered data or to impose con-trolled distortions on nominal data. Consequently, the same architecture supports both calibration-oriented inference and controlled simulation studies within a unified framework.  

> B. Parameterized transformation model

Let y ∈ Rd denote a generic detector observation vector, with y ∼ pchg for changed data and y ∼ pref for reference data. We introduce a deterministic transformation 

Tθ : Rd → Rd, (3) parameterized by θ, where θ has a direct physical interpreta-tion. 

a. Tracker toy model In the tracker toy example, we consider three measurement planes and use a single spatial coordinate. Let h = ( h1, h 2, h 3) ∈ R3 denote the hit coor-dinates on planes ℓ = 1 , 2, 3. A misalignment is injected by shifting plane ℓ = 2 by an unknown ∆x2. The correction transformation applies an opposite shift to the second compo-nent: 

T∆x2 (h) = ( h1, h 2 + ∆ x2, h 3). (4) 

b. Calorimeter aging Let e ∈ RN denote the vector of cell-wise energy deposits for an event in the changed dataset, with ei the deposit in cell i. Aging is modeled as a cell-wise attenuation with coefficients Ai ∈ (0 , 1] such that e(i)aged =

Ai e(i)true . The calibration transformation rescales cell energies to undo the attenuation: 

Tα(e)i = ei

αi

, α = ( α1, . . . , α N ), α i ∈ (0 , 1] . (5) Ideally, αi converges to the true aging coefficient Ai. While these two cases differ in dimensionality and physical inter-pretation, both can be treated uniformly within the proposed framework by treating θ as trainable parameters of a deter-ministic transformation module Tθ , optimized through adver-sarial distribution matching.  

> C. Adversarial objective

We introduce a critic Cϕ parameterized by ϕ, constrained to be 1-Lipschitz. The WGAN objective for aligning cor-rected changed data with the reference data is 

min  

> θ

max  

> ϕ∈C

Ey∼pref [Cϕ(y)] − Ey∼pchg [Cϕ(Tθ (y))] , (6) where C denotes the set of 1-Lipschitz functions. The critic is trained to maximize the objective, while θ is trained to mini-mize it, driving Tθ (pchg ) toward pref .In both cases, the critic is trained to maximize the objec-tive (increase the estimated Wasserstein distance), while θ is trained to minimize it (reduce the distance by improving the transformation). -4 CORRECTING SENSOR-INDUCED . . . Nucl. Sci. Tech. , () Refrenced Data 

Transfomed Data 

Critic  Calculate 

> wasserstein
> distance
> Generator

Transition Parameter  θ

Changed Data 

Fig. 1. Architecture of the proposed WGAN-inspired adversarial parameter-search framework. 

Algorithm 1 Adversarial parameter search 

Require: Reference dataset Dref , changed dataset Dchg , critic Cϕ,transformation Tθ , clipping parameter c, number of critic up-dates ncritic 

Ensure: Learned parameters θ

1: Initialize critic parameters ϕ

2: Initialize transformation parameters θ (e.g., αi ← 1 for calorimeter; ∆x2 ← 0 for tracker) 

3: for each training iteration do 

4: for ncritic critic updates do 

5: Sample minibatch xref ∼ D ref 

6: Sample minibatch xchg ∼ D chg 

7: Correct changed samples: ˜x ← Tθ (xchg )

8: Critic loss (to minimize by gradient descent): 

LC = −



E[Cϕ(xref )] − E[Cϕ(˜ x)] 



9: Update ϕ by descending ∇ϕLC

10: Clip critic weights: ϕ ← clip( ϕ, −c, c )

11: end for 

12: Sample minibatch xchg ∼ D chg 

13: Correct changed samples: ˜x ← Tθ (xchg )

14: Generator/transformation loss: 

LT = − E[Cϕ(˜ x)] 

15: Update θ by descending ∇θ LT

16: end for 

17: return θ

IV. EXPERIMENTS A. Case study I: Tracker Toy Model 

As a first validation of the proposed adversarial parameter-search framework, we consider a simplified tracking-detector toy model. The purpose of this study is not to provide a re-alistic alignment solution, but rather to demonstrate that the method can reliably recover a known geometric misalignment parameter in a controlled and interpretable setting. The toy detector consists of three tracking layers (Fig. 2) Tracker 1  Tracker 2  Tracker 3  

> Straight track
> → x ₁≈x ₂≈x ₃
> Inclined track
> → x ₁≠x₂≠x₃
> Tracker 1 Tracker 3
> Straight track
> → x ₁≈x ₂≈x ₃
> Inclined track
> → x ₁≠x₂≠x₃
> Tracker 2
> Δx ₂

Fig. 2. Tracker toy model, a misalignment is injected by shifting the second plane by ∆x2, producing a systematic change in hit patterns (and residual distributions) relative to the nominal geometry. 

that record one-dimensional hit coordinates. Two types of trajectories are simulated: straight tracks and inclined tracks. In the reference configuration, all three planes are perfectly aligned, yielding consistent geometric relations across layers. Two datasets are constructed: • Reference dataset (Dref ): generated with all tracker layers at their nominal positions. • Changed dataset (Dchg ): generated by shifting the second tracking plane by a constant offset ∆x2 while keeping the remaining planes fixed. 

a. Generator as a single parameter offset model In this setup, we have a reference (undamaged) distribution pref 

and a changed/distorted distribution pchg . Samples from the changed dataset are passed through the generator, which in this case is as a deterministic correction transform Tθ with a single trainable scalar parameter θ = d∆x2. Each sample is a hit tuple h = ( h1, h 2, h 3) ∈ R3, where hℓ is the mea-sured x coordinate on plane ℓ ∈ { 1, 2, 3}. The transformation acts on the second coordinate and outputs a corrected sample 

˜h = T d∆x2 (h):

˜h = T d∆x2 (h) = ( h1, h 2 + d∆x2, h 3). (7) -5 Saraa Ali et al. Nucl. Sci. Tech. , () Training therefore directly yields d∆x2 as the inferred mis-alignment correction. The critic Cϕ is a neural network trained with the WGAN objective to maximize the separation between reference samples href ∼ pref and corrected sam-ples ˜h ∼ T d∆x2 (pchg ), providing an estimate of the Wasser-stein distance. The parameter d∆x2 is updated in the opposite direction to minimize this estimated distance, thereby align-ing T d∆x2 (pchg ) with pref . At convergence, d∆x2 approaches 

−∆x2, since this value best aligns the corrected and refer-ence hit distributions. To study the sensitivity to a systematic distortion, a fixed shift value of ∆x2 = 0 .01 is applied to the detector coordinates. Each dataset contains only hit coor-dinates and does not include labels or track level correspon-dences between the reference and changed samples, ensuring a fully unsupervised setup based exclusively on distribution-level information. To assess robustness against measurement uncertainty, independent Gaussian noise is added to the hit coordinates in the changed dataset. The noise standard de-viation σ is varied over several orders of magnitude, ranging from negligible detector noise to values comparable to the ap-plied shift.  

> B. Case study II: Calorimeter Aging

This case study investigates whether the proposed ad-versarial parameter search framework can recover cell wise aging effects in a fully unsupervised manner by exploit-ing distributional differences between undamaged and aged calorimeter responses. 

a. Simulation and data representation Monte Carlo simulations are performed using the G EANT 4 toolkit [54]. We generate 10 5 events of single π− mesons with an expo-nential kinetic-energy spectrum and a flat transverse impact distribution; the particle momentum is oriented perpendicu-lar to the upstream face of the calorimeter. The detector ge-ometry corresponds to a highly granular sampling calorime-ter with alternating 20 mm lead absorber plates and 5 mm polystyrene scintillator tiles, segmented into a transverse cell grid. To reduce edge effects and shower leakage, we restrict the analysis to the central 16 × 16 cells in each sensitive layer. Fig. 3 shows the corresponding transverse hit-activity map aggregated over the dataset. Each event is represented as a 3D tensor 

X ∈ RL×H×W ,

where L is the number of sensitive layers and (H, W ) corre-spond to the selected transverse cell grid; Xℓ,u,v is the energy deposit in cell (ℓ, u, v ). We denote by pref and pchg the distri-butions of undamaged and aged events, respectively. 

b. Aging model and datasets Two complementary datasets are constructed: • Undamaged dataset (Dref ): events X ∼ pref simu-lated without aging effects. • Changed dataset (Dchg ): events Xchg ∼ pchg ob-tained by applying cell-wise signal attenuation to emu-late radiation damage.     

> Fig. 3. Hit activity map in the central 16 ×16 cell region (counts summed over events).

We model aging through a cell-wise coefficient field 

A ∈ (0 , 1] L×H×W ,

so that an undamaged event X is mapped to an aged event by element-wise multiplication: 

Xchg = T age  

> A

(X) ≡ A⊙X, (Xchg )ℓ,u,v = Aℓ,u,v Xℓ,u,v ,

(8) where ⊙ denotes the Hadamard product. In our simulation setup, the coefficients are generated as 

Ai = f (ni) + N (0 , ϵ ), (9) where i indexes calorimeter cells, ni is the total hit count ac-cumulated by cell i over the dataset, f (·) is a monotone decay model assigning smaller coefficients to more frequently ac-tivated cells, and ϵ controls cell-to-cell miscalibration noise (unless stated otherwise, ϵ = 0 .01 ). Fig. 4 illustrates the ef-fect of aging by comparing the per event total deposited en-ergy, Esum = P 

> i

E(i), for undamaged and aged samples, where a noticeable shift is observed. 

c. Generator as a calibration field The generator is the parameterized transformation Tθ whose trainable parameters are the calibration coefficients themselves: 

θ ≡ bA ∈ (0 , 1] L×H×W .

Operationally, bA is implemented as a learnable tensor match-ing the calorimeter granularity (a 3D parameter field). Given an aged event Xchg ∼ pchg , the generator applies an element wise correction and outputs a calibrated event 

eX = T bA(Xchg ) ≡ Xchg ⊘ bA, eXℓ,u,v = (Xchg )ℓ,u,v 

bAℓ,u,v 

,

(10) where ⊘ denotes element wise division. To ensure numerical stability, we constrain bAℓ,u,v ∈ [αmin , 1] via clamping after each update. -6 CORRECTING SENSOR-INDUCED . . . Nucl. Sci. Tech. , () 0 20 40 60 80 100  

> Esum [GeV]
> 0
> 2000
> 4000
> 6000
> 8000
> 10000
> 12000
> 14000
> Entries / bin
> Energy Sum Distribution - Undamaged vs Damaged
> Undamaged
> Damaged

Fig. 4. Distribution of total deposited energy per event for undam-aged and aged calorimeter responses. 

The critic network Cϕ is trained with the WGAN objec-tive to estimate the Wasserstein distance between the cor-rected changed distribution T bA(pchg ) and the reference dis-tribution pref . Training alternates between updating the critic to maximize the estimated Wasserstein discrepancy and up-dating the generator parameters bA to minimize it. At conver-gence, bA provides an estimate of the underlying aging field and thus yields cell-wise calibration coefficients directly as learned generator parameters. Although aging primarily affects the global energy scale, global energy-sum projections alone are insufficient for iden-tifying cell wise effects. Instead, the information that con-strains bA is encoded in the high-dimensional structure of cell level depositions and their correlations, which are matched implicitly by the critic during adversarial training. The over-all architecture of the WGAN-inspired calibration model is shown in Fig. 1. 

V. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION 

a. Tracker toy model Fig. 5 reports the absolute estima-tion error | c∆x − ∆x| as a function of the Gaussian noise stan-dard deviation σ for injected misalignment magnitudes. For low and moderate noise levels, the inferred shift remains close to the true value, with errors below 10 −3. As σ approaches the scale of the injected shift, the error increases rapidly, con-sistent with the loss of identifiable geometric information in the hit tuples. Overall, the toy study demonstrates that the proposed distribution matching objective can recover a sim-ple, physically interpretable alignment parameter when the distortion is not dominated by measurement noise. 

b. Calorimeter aging We first examine the effect of simulated aging on the calorimeter response. Fig. 4 com-pares the total reconstructed energy ( Esum ) distributions for the undamaged and damaged datasets. The damaged distri-bution exhibits an overall suppression of the energy scale, as 10 −5 10 −4 10 −3 10 −2 10 −1 

Noise std σ

> 0.000
> 0.001
> 0.002
> 0.003
> |̂Δ x2 − Δ x2|

Fig. 5. Absolute error of the estimated tracker shift | c∆x − ∆x|

as a function of the Gaussian noise standard deviation σ. Accurate recovery is observed for low and moderate noise levels, while the es-timation error increases rapidly once the noise becomes comparable to the applied shift. 0 200 400 600 800 

> Epoch / Step
> 0.02
> 0.03
> 0.04
> 0.05
> 0.06
> 0.07
> 0.08
> 0.09
> 0.10
> RMSE
> RMSE vs Epoch

Fig. 6. RMSE between inferred and injected aging coefficients. 

expected from cell wise attenuation. At the same time, the distribution shape changes modestly, indicating that a one di-mensional global observable alone provides limited sensitiv-ity to spatially varying aging and that additional information must be exploited from the multi cell response patterns. The training dynamics of the WGAN-inspired calibration model are summarized in Fig. 6, which shows the RMSE be-tween the predicted and injected aging coefficients as a func-tion of epoch. The error decreases during training and reaches a stable plateau after roughly 650 -700 epochs, indicating con-sistent convergence under the chosen optimization setup. Fig. 7 compares the inferred coefficients to the injected values on a cell by cell basis. The estimates follow a clear positive correlation, with most cells clustered near the diag-onal, showing that the model recovers the dominant aging trend from distribution-level constraints. The largest devi-ations are observed for the most strongly attenuated cells, where reduced signal amplitudes and the injected stochas-tic perturbations limit the information available for param-eter identification. We do not interpret these deviations as a failure of calibration, but rather as an expected limitation of inferring fine grained, per cell fluctuations in an unsu--7 Saraa Ali et al. Nucl. Sci. Tech. , () 0.80 0.85 0.90 0.95 1.00 

> Real Values
> 0.80
> 0.85
> 0.90
> 0.95
> 1.00
> Predicted Values
> True vs Predicted

Fig. 7. Cell wise comparison of true and inferred aging coefficients. 0 20 40 60 80 100  

> Esum [GeV]
> 0
> 2000
> 4000
> 6000
> 8000
> 10000
> 12000
> Entries / bin
> Energy Sum Distribution - Undamaged vs Calibrated
> Undamaged
> Calibrated

Fig. 8. Energy-sum distributions for undamaged and calibrated calorimeter responses. 

pervised setting with finite statistics and noisy coefficients. The proposed method achieves a mean reconstruction error of RMSE = 0.0176 ± 0.0005 and a mean coefficient of determination of R2 = 0 .896 ± 0.007 . A simple per cell baseline that estimates aging as the ratio of mean responses, 

bAmean  

> i

= ⟨Echg    

> i⟩⟨Eref
> i⟩

, yields a worse agreement with the injected coefficients of with RMSE = 0 .0562 ±0.0008 . This compar-ison indicates that the proposed distribution level adversarial calibration extracts significantly more information from the full multi cell response than can be captured by matching only per cell mean energies. To assess the practical effect of the inferred parameters, we apply the learned correction to the damaged dataset and recompute the energy sum dis-tribution. Fig. 8 shows that the calibrated distribution moves closer to the undamaged reference over the full energy range. This indicates that the recovered coefficients compensate the dominant radiation-induced attenuation at the level of a global summary observable, while not guaranteeing perfect cell by 0.00   

> 0.01
> 0.02
> 0.03
> 0.04
> 0.05
> Noise Level
> 0.00
> 0.01
> 0.02
> 0.03
> 0.04
> 0.05
> RMSE
> Effect of Noise Level on RMSE of Aging Coefficient Estimation
> RMSE
> y=x

Fig. 9. Effect of stochastic coefficient noise ϵ on the RMSE of aging-coefficient estimation. 

cell recovery of the injected stochastic component. Finally, we evaluate sensitivity to uncertainty in the aging coefficients by varying the standard deviation ϵ of the additive Gaussian perturbation in the aging model over ϵ ∈ [0 , 0.05] .As shown in Fig. 9, the RMSE between inferred and injected coefficients increases monotonically with ϵ. This trend is expected: larger cell to cell stochastic variations reduce the identifiability of individual attenuation factors from distribu-tion matching alone, because multiple coefficient configura-tions can yield similar aggregate shower statistics. In the deterministic case ( ϵ = 0 ), the model attains its low-est error, RMSE = 0 .01573 , which reflects the achievable accuracy for recovering the global aging trend f (ni) under the given simulation and training setup. As ϵ increases, the attainable accuracy degrades gradually, reaching RMSE ≈

4.7 × 10 −2 at ϵ = 0 .05 .

VI. CONCLUSION 

We have presented a Wasserstein-inspired adversarial framework for unsupervised inference of sensor related trans-formation parameters, formulated as a distribution matching problem between reference and changed data regimes. By reinterpreting the generator as a deterministic transformation whose trainable weights correspond to physically meaningful parameters, the approach shifts the use of adversarial learning from sample synthesis to parameter recovery. We validated the method in two complementary settings. In a simplified tracking toy model, the framework recovers injected geomet-ric shifts in a low dimensional and fully controlled scenario, serving as a proof of concept for alignment style parameter in-ference. We then studied calorimeter aging using high gran-ularity Geant4-simulated data with cell wise signal attenua-tion. In this setup, the inferred aging coefficients show good agreement with the injected values and, when applied as a cal-ibration correction, improve the consistency between the cali-brated and undamaged energy response distributions, without requiring labeled calibration targets or event-level correspon--8 CORRECTING SENSOR-INDUCED . . . Nucl. Sci. Tech. , () dences. The results also illustrate a key limitation of purely distribution based inference: as channel to channel stochastic variations increase and become comparable to the underlying systematic effect, the identifiability of individual parameters deteriorates due to reduced discriminative information in the observed distributions. This suggests that adversarial calibra-tion is best viewed as a complementary technique that reduces reliance on supervision, rather than a replacement for estab-lished workflows. Future work will focus on extending the framework to time dependent degradation, more realistic de-tector geometries and readout effects, and hybrid strategies that incorporate conventional calibration constraints or exter-nal reference signals, with the aim of reducing recalibration overheads in long running experiments. 

VII. ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 

The work was supported by the grant for research cen-ters in the field of AI provided by the Ministry of Economic Development of the Russian Federation in accordance with the agreement 000000C313925P4E0002 and the agreement with HSE University № 139-15-2025-009. The computation for this research was performed using the computational re-sources of HPC facilities at HSE University. 

[1] Sulemana Fatoama Abdulai, Tarek Zayed, Ibrahim Yahaya Wuni, Maxwell Fordjour Antwi-Afari, and Abdul-Mugis Yus-sif. Cross-industry review of autonomous alignment technolo-gies: Adaptation potential for modular construction. Journal of Cleaner Production , 495:145101, 2025. [2] Philip Stahmann, Maximilian Nebel, and Christian Janiesch. Ai-based real-time anomaly detection in industrial engineering: A structured literature review, taxonomy, and research agenda. 

Computers & Industrial Engineering , 207:111236, 2025. [3] Long Chen, Chenbin Xia, Zhehui Zhao, Haoran Fu, and Yun-min Chen. Ai-driven sensing technology: Review. Sensors ,24(10), 2024. [4] T Golling. Alignment of the Silicon Tracking Detector using Survey Constraints. Technical report, CERN, Geneva, 2006. [5] Erik Butz. Calibration, alignment and long-term performance of the cms silicon tracking detector, May 2009. [6] Tanmay Mudholkar and on behalf of the CMS Collaboration. Cms ecal monitoring and calibration in lhc run ii. Journal of Physics: Conference Series , 1162(1):012002, jan 2019. [7] G. Aad, B. Abbott, J. Abdallah, et al. ATLAS data quality op-erations and performance for 2015-2018 data-taking. Journal of Instrumentation , 15(04):P04003, 2020. [8] Tapio Lamp´ en and (forthe CMS Collaboration). Cms sili-con strip tracker calibration workflow and tools. Journal of Physics: Conference Series , 331(3):032044, dec 2011. [9] M Verducci. ATLAS conditions database experience with the LCG COOL conditions database project. J. Phys.: Conf. Ser. ,119:042031, 2008. [10] Ana Ovcharova. Track-Based Alignment of the Inner Detector of ATLAS. Technical report, CERN, Geneva, 2012. [11] PJ Laycock, MA Chelstowska, TC Donszelmann, J Guenther, A Nairz, R Nikolaidou, E Shabalina, J Strandberg, A Taffard, S Wang, and on behalf of the ATLAS Collaboration. Atlas data preparation in run 2. Journal of Physics: Conference Series ,898(4):042050, oct 2017. [12] B Pinto, A Amorim, P Pereira, M Elsing, R Hawkings, J Schieck, S Garcia, A Schaffer, H Ma, and A Anjos. Align-ment data streams for the atlas inner detector. Journal of Physics: Conference Series , 119(2):022030, jul 2008. [13] Yaroslav Ganin, Evgeniya Ustinova, Hana Ajakan, Pascal Ger-main, Hugo Larochelle, Franc ¸ois Laviolette, Mario March, and Victor Lempitsky. Domain-adversarial training of neural net-works. Journal of Machine Learning Research , 17(59):1–35, 2016. [14] Jun-Yan Zhu, Taesung Park, Phillip Isola, and Alexei A. Efros. Unpaired image-to-image translation using cycle-consistent adversarial networks. In 2017 IEEE International Conference on Computer Vision (ICCV) , pages 2242–2251, 2017. [15] Kyle Cranmer, Johann Brehmer, and Gilles Louppe. The fron-tier of simulation-based inference. Proceedings of the Na-tional Academy of Sciences of the United States of America ,117(48):30055–30062, December 2020. [16] Gilles Louppe, Joeri Hermans, and Kyle Cranmer. Adversarial variational optimization of non-differentiable simulators. In 

The 22nd international conference on artificial intelligence and statistics , pages 1438–1447. PMLR, 2019. [17] Joaquin Quinonero-Candela, Masashi Sugiyama, Anton Schwaighofer, and Neil D. Lawrence, editors. Dataset Shift in Machine Learning . Neural Information Processing Series. The MIT Press, Cambridge, MA, 2008. Hardcover edition. [18] Fabian Hinder, Valerie Vaquet, and Barbara Hammer. One or two things we know about concept drift—a survey on monitor-ing in evolving environments. part a: detecting concept drift. 

Frontiers in Artificial Intelligence , Volume 7 - 2024, 2024. [19] Yaroslav Ganin, Evgeniya Ustinova, Hana Ajakan, Pascal Ger-main, Hugo Larochelle, Franc ¸ois Laviolette, Mario March, and Victor Lempitsky. Domain-adversarial training of neural net-works. Journal of machine learning research , 17(59):1–35, 2016. [20] Martin Arjovsky, Soumith Chintala, and L´ eon Bottou. Wasser-stein generative adversarial networks. In International confer-ence on machine learning , pages 214–223. Pmlr, 2017. [21] ATLAS Collaboration. ATLAS inner detector . Technical design report. ATLAS. CERN, Geneva, 1997. [22] ATLAS Collaboration. ATLAS detector and physics perfor-mance . Technical design report. ATLAS. CERN, Geneva, 1999. [23] C. W. Fabjan and F. Gianotti. Calorimetry for particle physics. 

Reviews of Modern Physics , 75:1243–1286, 2003. [24] S. S. Korpachov and M. V. Chadeeva. Study of the unifor-mity of the response of scintillation tiles for high-granularity calorimeters. Brief Communications on Physics of Lebedev In-stitute , (10):52–56, 2018. [25] A. A. Alves, E. Ben-Haim, D. Bettinardi, et al. The lhcb detec-tor at the lhc. Journal of Instrumentation , 3:S08005, 2008. [26] K. Aamodt, A. Abrahantes Quintana, R. Acosta, et al. The alice experiment at the cern lhc. Journal of Instrumentation ,3:S08002, 2008. 

-9 Saraa Ali et al. Nucl. Sci. Tech. , () 

[27] G. Aad, B. Abbott, J. Abdallah, et al. The atlas experiment at the cern large hadron collider. Journal of Instrumentation ,3:S08003, 2008. [28] Baran Hashemi and Claudius Krause. Deep generative models for detector signature simulation: A taxonomic review. Re-views in Physics , 12:100092, 2024. [29] Luke de Oliveira, Michela Paganini, and Benjamin Nachman. Learning particle physics by example: Location-aware genera-tive adversarial networks for physics synthesis. Computing and Software for Big Science , 1(1):4, 2017. [30] Anja Butter, Sascha Diefenbacher, Gregor Kasieczka, Ben-jamin Nachman, and Tilman Plehn. GANplifying event sam-ples. SciPost Phys. , 10:139, 2021. [31] Diederik P Kingma and Max Welling. Auto-encoding varia-tional bayes, 2022. [32] Ian J Goodfellow, Jean Pouget-Abadie, Mehdi Mirza, Bing Xu, David Warde-Farley, Sherjil Ozair, Aaron Courville, and Yoshua Bengio. Generative adversarial nets. Advances in neu-ral information processing systems , 27, 2014. [33] Ivan Kobyzev, Simon J.D. Prince, and Marcus A. Brubaker. Normalizing flows: An introduction and review of current methods. IEEE Transactions on Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence , 43(11):3964–3979, 2021. [34] Jonathan Ho, Ajay Jain, and Pieter Abbeel. Denoising dif-fusion probabilistic models. In H. Larochelle, M. Ranzato, R. Hadsell, M.F. Balcan, and H. Lin, editors, Advances in Neu-ral Information Processing Systems , volume 33, pages 6840– 6851. Curran Associates, Inc., 2020. [35] Su Yeon Chang, Steven Herbert, Sofia Vallecorsa, El´ ıas F Com-barro, and Ross Duncan. Dual-parameterized quantum circuit gan model in high energy physics. In EPJ Web of Conferences ,volume 251, page 03050. EDP Sciences, 2021. [36] Fedor Ratnikov, Alexander Rogachev, Sergey Mokhnenko, Artem Maevskiy, Denis Derkach, Adam Davis, Nikita Kazeev, Lucio Anderlini, Matteo Barbetti, and Benedetto Gianluca Siddi. A full detector description using neural network driven simulation. Nuclear Instruments and Methods in Physics Re-search Section A: Accelerators, Spectrometers, Detectors and Associated Equipment , 1046:167591, 2023. [37] Lucio Anderlini, Matteo Barbetti, Simone Capelli, Glo-ria Corti, Adam Davis, Denis Derkach, Nikita Kazeev, Artem Maevskiy, Maurizio Martinelli, Sergei Mokhnenko, Benedetto Gianluca Siddi, and Zehua Xu. The LHCb ultra-fast simulation option, Lamarr: design and validation. EPJ Web of Conferences , 295:03040, May 2024. Proceedings of the 26th International Conference on Computing in High Energy and Nuclear Physics (CHEP 2023). [38] Konstantin T Matchev, Alexander Roman, and Prasanth Shyamsundar. Uncertainties associated with gan-generated datasets in high energy physics. SciPost Physics , 12(3):104, 2022. [39] Su Yeon Chang, Sofia Vallecorsa, El´ ıas F Combarro, and Fed-erico Carminati. Quantum generative adversarial networks in a continuous-variable architecture to simulate high energy physics detectors. arXiv preprint arXiv:2101.11132 , 2021. [40] Adrian Alan Pol, Victor Berger, Cecile Germain, Gianluca Cerminara, and Maurizio Pierini. Anomaly detection with conditional variational autoencoders. In 2019 18th IEEE in-ternational conference on machine learning and applications (ICMLA) , pages 1651–1657. IEEE, 2019. [41] Giulia Lavizzari, Giacomo Boldrini, Simone Gennai, and Pietro Govoni. A variational autoencoder for model indepen-dent searches of new physics at lhc. In International Con-ference on Image Analysis and Processing , pages 159–169. Springer, 2023. [42] Markus Stoye, Johann Brehmer, Gilles Louppe, Juan Pavez, and Kyle Cranmer. Likelihood-free inference with an improved cross-entropy estimator. arXiv preprint arXiv:1808.00973 ,2018. [43] Tigran Ramazyan, Mikhail Hushchyn, and Denis Derkach. Global optimisation of black-box functions with generative models in the wasserstein space. In ECAI 2024 , pages 2394– 2401. IOS Press, 2024. [44] Risma Febrianti, Yekti Widyaningsih, and Saskya Soemartojo. The parameter estimation of logistic regression with maximum likelihood method and score function modification. In Journal of physics: Conference series , volume 1725, page 012014. IOP Publishing, 2021. [45] Anders Andreassen, Shih-Chieh Hsu, Benjamin Nachman, Natchanon Suaysom, and Adi Suresh. Parameter estimation using neural networks in the presence of detector effects. Phys-ical Review D , 103(3):036001, 2021. [46] ATLAS Collaboration. Alignment of the ATLAS Inner Detec-tor Tracking System with 2010 LHC proton-proton collisions at √s = 7 TeV. Technical report, CERN, Geneva, 2011. [47] P Br¨ uckman, A Hicheur, and S J Haywood. Global chi2 ap-proach to the Alignment of the ATLAS Silicon Tracking De-tectors. Technical report, CERN, Geneva, 2005. [48] A Bocci and W Hulsbergen. TRT Alignment For SR1 Cosmics and Beyond. Technical report, CERN, Geneva, 2007. [49] Zhiwen Zuo, Lei Zhao, Ailin Li, Zhizhong Wang, Haibo Chen, Wi Xing, and Dongming Lu. Dual distribution matching gan. 

Neurocomputing , 478:37–48, 2022. [50] Martin Arjovsky, Soumith Chintala, and L´ eon Bottou. Wasser-stein generative adversarial networks. In Doina Precup and Yee Whye Teh, editors, Proceedings of the 34th International Conference on Machine Learning , volume 70 of Proceedings of Machine Learning Research , pages 214–223. PMLR, 06–11 Aug 2017. [51] Ishaan Gulrajani, Faruk Ahmed, Martin Arjovsky, Vincent Du-moulin, and Aaron C Courville. Improved training of wasser-stein gans. Advances in neural information processing systems ,30, 2017. [52] Takeru Miyato, Toshiki Kataoka, Masanori Koyama, and Yuichi Yoshida. Spectral normalization for generative adver-sarial networks. arXiv preprint arXiv:1802.05957 , 2018. [53] ATLAS Collaboration. Study of alignment-related systematic effects on the ATLAS Inner Detector tracking. Technical re-port, CERN, Geneva, 2012. [54] S. Agostinelli et al. GEANT4–a simulation toolkit. Nucl. In-strum. Meth. A , 506:250–303, 2003. 

-10