Title: EmbeddGAN: A Novel GAN Framework Using an Embedding Network and Gini Distance Correlation

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2609.22508v1

Published Time: Tue, 22 Sep 2026 00:18:09 GMT

Number of Pages: 18

Markdown Content:
# EMBEDD GAN: A N OVEL GAN F RAMEWORK USING AN 

# EMBEDDING NETWORK AND GINI DISTANCE CORRELATION ∗

MaTais Caldwell †

Department of Computer and Information Science University of Mississippi Oxford, MS 38677 USA 

mkcaldwe@go.olemiss.edu 

Yixin Chen 

Department of Computer and Information Science University of Mississippi Oxford, MS 38677 USA 

Xin Dang 

Department of Mathematics University of Mississippi Oxford, MS 38677 USA 

Charles Walter 

Department of Computer and Information Science University of Mississippi Oxford, MS 38677 USA 

# ABSTRACT 

Generative Adversarial Networks (GANs) have demonstrated strong performance in generating high-quality synthetic data. However, they are limited by no formal guarantees regarding convergence and the effectiveness of the learning process. In practice, this leads to training instability, mode collapse, and sensitivity to hyperparameters. To address this, we propose EmbeddGAN, a novel adversarial training framework based on a dependence-based objective . Instead of relying on a discriminator that classifies samples as real or fake, EmbeddGAN introduces an embedding network that learns a representation in which statistical dependence between samples and their real/fake labels is maximized, while the generator is trained to minimize this dependence. This objective is implemented using the Gini distance correlation (gCor), which equals zero if and only if the embeddings are statistically independent of the real/fake label. Minimizing this objective therefore encourages real and generated samples to become statistically indistinguishable in the learned embedding space. The embedding network projects both real and generated data into a shared low-dimensional space, where distributional discrepancies can be measured directly through pairwise distances. We adopt a minimax training strategy: the embedding network maximizes the Gini distance correlation (maximizing dependence), while the generator minimizes it (minimizing dependence). Experiments on the MNIST, CIFAR-10, and CelebA datasets demonstrate that EmbeddGAN achieves competitive performance relative to established baselines while exhibiting notably stable training dynamics on the evaluated datasets. 

Keywords EmbeddingNet, Gini Distance Correlation, GAN, Energy Distance. 

# 1 Introduction 

Generative Adversarial Networks (GANs) have established themselves as an important framework for generative modeling since their inception [1]. By using an adversarial framework involving a generator and discriminator, GANs are capable of producing high-quality synthetic data that closely resembles real-world data distributions. Their applications span across diverse domains, including image synthesis [2, 3], data augmentation [4], privacy-preserving data generation [5], and secure content creation [6]. 

> ∗

This work has been submitted to the IEEE for possible publication. Copyright may be transferred without notice, after which this version may no longer be accessible. 

> †

Corresponding author. arXiv:2609.22508v1 [cs.LG] 18 Sep 2026 EmbeddGAN: A Novel GAN Framework Using an Embedding Network and Gini Distance Correlation In addition to their ability to produce synthetic data, GANs are very adaptable. Variants like conditional GANs [7] allow for controlled generation based on specific input conditions, while models like StyleGAN [3] enable fine-grained manipulation of generated outputs. This flexibility has opened new possibilities in creative industries, such as text-driven image inpainting [8], natural image generation [9], and style transfer [10]. Furthermore, GANs have been leveraged for privacy-preserving process-data generation, as demonstrated by ProcessGAN [11]. Despite their transformative potential, GANs are plagued by several persistent challenges. GANs are prone to training instability [12], as the adversarial dynamic between the generator and discriminator often leads to oscillations and non-convergence. This instability is compounded by mode collapse [12], where the generator produces limited or repetitive outputs, failing to capture the full diversity of the data distribution. Beyond these practical issues, the theoretical foundations of GAN training remain limited. The standard GAN objective optimizes the Jensen-Shannon divergence, which saturates and yields vanishing gradients when the real and generated distributions have disjoint support [12], providing no formal guarantee that training converges to a meaningful equilibrium. While Wasserstein GAN [13] replaces the Jensen-Shannon divergence with the earth movers distance, its guarantees depend on exact enforcement of Lipschitz constraints. Formally grounded GAN training objectives remain scarce, motivating the exploration of alternative loss functions with well-defined statistical properties. Regardless of the choice of divergence measure, the binary classification formulation itself is a source of instability. A dependence-based objective sidesteps this entirely by replacing the real/fake classifier with a principled measure of statistical alignment between distributions To explore alternative approaches to GAN training while preserving the adversarial dynamic, this paper proposes 

EmbeddGAN , a novel method where, instead of training a generator against a traditional discriminator, we introduce an 

embedding network that projects data into a lower-dimensional embedding space. This embedding network serves as a 

feature extractor that maps data to compact representations in a low-dimensional embedding space. These embeddings are then used to compute the Gini distance correlation loss [14]. This loss quantifies statistical dependence between data and their labels (real or generated) by contrasting within-group and between-group distances in the shared embedding space. Gini distance correlation loss provides a formal guarantee of distributional alignment: when the loss is minimized, the real and generated data distributions become statistically indistinguishable in the embedding space. We use stochastic gradient descent to perform minimax training: unlike traditional GAN frameworks, the embedding network is updated to maximize the loss (maximizing dependence), while the generator is updated to minimize the loss, encouraging adversarial learning in the embedding space. This process ensures that the generator is continually challenged to produce high-quality synthetic data. This approach represents a departure from classical discriminator-based-training, exploring an alternative adversarial learning paradigm. Lastly, EmbeddGAN is architecturally agnostic: the Gini distance correlation loss is completely decoupled from the specific architecture of the embedding network, allowing for flexibility in choosing different convolutional architectures or projection strategies. This means that our method can be easily adapted to various GAN architectures, making it a versatile tool for generative modeling across different domains and applications. The contributions of this paper are as follows: • We propose a novel training strategy that replaces the traditional GAN discriminator with an embedding network trained using the Gini distance correlation loss. • We introduce an adversarial feature space learning mechanism via minimizing the negative Gini distance correlation, creating a novel training dynamic that differs from traditional GAN approaches. • We conduct a controlled empirical evaluation on MNIST, CIFAR-10, and CelebA, demonstrating competitive performance against DCGAN, WGAN-GP, and SN-GAN while exhibiting notably stable training dynamics. • We provide a systematic ablation analysis, including Fourier spectrum diagnostics, embedding dimension sen-sitivity, and update ratio effects. Lastly, we offer practical insight into the design requirements of dependence-based adversarial training. The remainder of this paper is structured as follows: Section 2 reviews the classical GAN formulation and the Gini distance correlation. In Section 3, we present our model architecture. Section 4 describes our experimental setup, and Section 5 presents our results. Finally, Section 6 concludes the paper and discusses future work. 

# 2 Background 

In this section we provide a brief overview of the traditional GAN formulation and discuss some of its issues. We end with a discussion of the Gini distance correlation and its properties. 2EmbeddGAN: A Novel GAN Framework Using an Embedding Network and Gini Distance Correlation 

2.1 Generative Adversarial Networks Generator    

> Gz∼ N (0 ,1)
> Fake Image
> xfake
> Real Image
> xreal
> Discriminator
> D
> Real / Fake Probability Binary Cross-Entropy Loss (Min/Max) Discriminator Update Generator Update
> Output Space Latent Vector

Figure 1: Overview of the traditional GAN architecture. A basic GAN consists of two neural networks, a generator and a discriminator, that play an adversarial game. The generator G takes in a random noise z, typically drawn from a Gaussian, and tries to produce samples that are indistinguishable from real data. The discriminator D takes as input both real and generated samples, and tries to correctly classify them as either real or fake. The generator continually tries to fool the discriminator by generating samples that are increasingly similar to real data. An overview of a generalized traditional GAN architecture is shown in Fig. 1. Formally, the game between the generator and discriminator can be expressed as a minimax optimization problem: 

min  

> G

max  

> D

V (D, G ) = Ex∼pdata (x)[log D(x)] + Ez∼pz (z)[log(1 − D(G(z)))] (1) where pdata is the distribution of real data, and pz is the distribution of random noise. Typically, the discriminator becomes much better at distinguishing real samples from fake ones, leading to vanishing gradients for the generator. This can cause the generator to produce low-quality samples or even experience mode collapse. To mitigate these issues, several alternatives to the traditional GAN objective have been proposed. Wasserstein GANs replace the Jenson-Shannon divergence with the Earth Mover’s distance to improve training dynamics [12]. Other approaches, such as MMD-GANs [15], leverage kernel-based distances like Maximum Mean Discrepancy to evaluate differences between distributions. These metrics offer stability and theoretical grounding but often require careful tuning of hyperparameters and kernel choices. Other papers have explored using learned feature spaces rather than raw pixel space to compute similarity between real and generated data [16, 17]. In contrast with MMD-GANs, the embedding space in EmbeddGAN is adversarially learned rather than fixed. Building on feature-based approaches, projections have emerged as an effective tool for dimensionality reduction in generative modeling [18, 19]. Several works improve training stability and sample quality using multiple discriminators or ensemble strategies. For example, Neyshabur et al. [20] train a single generator against multiple discriminators, each operating on a different random low-dimensional projection. Other multi-discriminator methods assign distinct discriminators to different aspects of the data distribution [21]. Improved GAN training techniques [4] further highlight the role of feature-based evaluation and alternative loss functions. Our work extends these insights by combining learned convolutional features with learned projections. 

2.2 Gini Distance Correlation 

We adopt the Gini distance correlation proposed by Zhang et al. [14] as our loss function. This statistic quantifies the dependence between a continuous variable and a categorical label using Gini mean differences. It equals zero if and only if the variables are statistically independent, making it well-suited for distributional alignment tasks in generative modeling. Let X ∈ Rn be a random variable from distribution F , and let Y ∈ { 0, 1} be a categorical variable with conditional distributions F0 and F1 over X. Define pk = P(Y = k), and let Xk ∼ Fk, with X′ and X′ 

> k

denoting independent copies of X and Xk, respectively. The Gini distance covariance is defined as: 3EmbeddGAN: A Novel GAN Framework Using an Embedding Network and Gini Distance Correlation gCov (X, Y ) = 

> 1

X

> k=0

pk[2 E∥Xk − X∥ − E∥Xk − X′

> k

∥ − E∥X − X′∥] (2) The corresponding Gini distance correlation is the normalized form: 

ρg (X, Y ) = gCov (X, Y )

E∥X − X′∥ (3) This satisfies ρg (X, Y ) ∈ [0 , 1] , and equals zero if and only if X ⊥ Y .We estimate ρg from batches of embeddings. Let A = {ai}mi=1 , B = {bj }mj=1 , and X = A ∪ B = {x1, . . . , x 2m},where Y = 1 for real and Y = 0 for generated samples. The empirical Gini distance covariance and normalizing factor are: gCov (A, B ) = 1

m2

X

> i,j

∥ai − bj ∥ − 12m(m − 1) 

X

> i̸=j

[∥ai − aj ∥ + ∥bi − bj ∥] (4) 

∆( X) = 1(2 m)2

X

> i,j

∥xi − xj ∥ (5) The empirical Gini distance correlation is: 

ρg (A, B ) = gCov (A, B )∆( X) (6) This normalized formulation ensures that ρg (A, B ) ∈ [0 , 1] , and equals zero when the real and generated distributions are statistically indistinguishable in the embedding space. Minimizing ρg therefore encourages the combined variable X = A ∪ B to become statistically independent of the binary label Y ∈ { 0, 1}. In other words, when the distributions of real and generated samples align, the label becomes uninformative with respect to the embeddings, resulting in ρg = 0 . This makes the Gini distance correlation a natural objective for distributional alignment in generative modeling. Compared to adversarial losses, this approach offers a symmetric, differentiable objective with a clear probabilistic interpretation. In the univariate case, the intra-group terms reduce to the Gini Mean Difference (GMD). This loss is core to our framework. In the next section, we describe our model architecture, which leverages this loss to create a novel adversarial training dynamic. 

# 3 Methods 

3.1 Model Architecture 

At the heart of EmbeddGAN is the Gini distance correlation, which quantifies the statistical dependence between data and their labels. Given labels of real or generated data, a Gini distance correlation of zero implies statistical independence, i.e., the real and generated data come from the same distribution. Unlike classical discriminators trained to classify samples as real or fake, our embedding network aims to identify a low-dimensional space that maximizes this dependence. The generator attempts to minimize it. This adversarial objective is implemented via stochastic gradient descent, both networks having opposing goals: the embedding network increases dependence by maximizing the Gini distance correlation, and the generator decreases its loss by minimizing it. This leads to an adversarial learning process grounded not in classification accuracy, but in implicitly reducing the divergence between generated and real data distributions within a shared embedding space. Our adversarial training dynamic is formalized by the following minimax objective: 

min  

> G

max  

> E

ρg (E(G(z)) , E (xreal )) (7) where ρg (·, ·) denotes the empirical Gini distance correlation between the embedded fake and real samples. The embedding network defines the learned feature space in which statistical distances are computed. Rather than relying on fixed similarity kernels as in MMD-GANs [15], our approach uses a learnable convolutional architecture followed by a linear projection to embed both real and generated images into a shared low-dimensional space. Across 4EmbeddGAN: A Novel GAN Framework Using an Embedding Network and Gini Distance Correlation Table 1: Generator architectures. BN = batch normalization; LReLU = LeakyReLU(0.2); k = kernel size; s = stride. LeakyReLU is used in place of ReLU across all layers to ensure consistency across model components. 

MNIST Layer Output Shape 

Input z ∼ N (0, I100 ) 100 

Linear, BN, LReLU, Reshape 256 × 7 × 7

ConvT 256 → 128 , k=5 , s=1 , BN, LReLU 128 × 7 × 7

ConvT 128 → 64 , k=5 , s=2 , BN, LReLU 64 × 14 × 14 

ConvT 64 → 1, k=5 , s=2 , Tanh 1 × 28 × 28 

CIFAR-10 Layer Output Shape 

Input z ∼ N (0, I100 ) 100 

Linear, BN, LReLU, Reshape 512 × 4 × 4

ConvT 512 → 256 , k=4 , s=2 , BN, LReLU 256 × 8 × 8

ConvT 256 → 128 , k=4 , s=2 , BN, LReLU 128 × 16 × 16 

ConvT 128 → 3, k=4 , s=2 , Tanh 3 × 32 × 32 

CelebA Layer Output Shape 

Input z ∼ N (0, I100 ) 100 

Linear, BN, LReLU, Reshape 512 × 4 × 4

ConvT 512 → 256 , k=5 , s=2 , BN, LReLU 256 × 8 × 8

ConvT 256 → 128 , k=5 , s=2 , BN, LReLU 128 × 16 × 16 

ConvT 128 → 64 , k=5 , s=2 , BN, LReLU 64 × 32 × 32 

ConvT 64 → 3, k=5 , s=2 , Tanh 3 × 64 × 64 

datasets, the embedding network follows a consistent structural pattern mirroring the DCGAN discriminator [2]: stacked stride-2 Conv2d layers with LeakyReLU activations and dropout, followed by a flattening step and a final linear projection into an n-dimensional embedding space. We set n = 100 for our experiments, but we find any value of 

n ≥ 3 to be sufficient. Spectral normalization [22] is applied to all convolutional and linear layers to stabilize training by constraining the Lipschitz constant of the embedding network. While exact dimensions and input channels vary between datasets (e.g., grayscale vs. RGB), the design principle remains the same: learn task-relevant representations while retaining sufficient flexibility for distributional alignment. The generator follows the DCGAN architecture [2], consisting of strided transpose convolutional layers with batch normalization, with LeakyReLU activations used in place of ReLU across all layers to ensure consistency across model components. All convolutional and linear weights are initialized using a Gaussian distribution with mean 0 and standard deviation of 0.02 , a choice known to promote stable GAN training [2]. This architecture enables the model to compare real and generated data meaningfully through Gini distance correlation. An overview of our generator architectures can be seen in Table 1. It is important to note that EmbeddGAN is architecture-agnostic. The Gini distance correlation loss operates entirely in a learned embedding space. The loss has no structural coupling with the architectures that produce these embeddings. The generator can be any differentiable mapping from latent vector to image (convolutional, residual, transformer-based, etc.), and the embedding network can be any differentiable encoder. In this work, DCGAN-style generators and convolutional encoders are used across all datasets to ensure a fair comparison with the DCGAN, WGAN-GP, and SN-GAN baselines; however, EmbeddGAN should be understood as a general training objective and optimization protocol rather than a fixed architecture, and is applicable to more expressive generator designs such as residual or attention-based networks. An overview of the full architecture is shown in Fig. 2. 5EmbeddGAN: A Novel GAN Framework Using an Embedding Network and Gini Distance Correlation 

3.2 Regularization of the Embedding Network 

An embedding network trained adversarially without constraints is susceptible to a shortcut exploitation. Without bounds on the embedding vectors, the network can separate real from generated samples by exploiting the magnitude of the embedding vectors rather than their distributional structure, a degenerate solution that does not require the generator to produce realistic samples. We therefore apply L2 normalization to all embedding outputs, projecting them onto the unit hypersphere and preventing any dimension from dominating the representation. However, constraining the magnitude alone is insufficient: once the magnitude shortcut is closed, the embedding network can exploit high-contrast regions in the input as an alternative shortcut. We apply R1 gradient regularization [23] to the embedding network, penalizing the squared norm of gradients with respect to real samples. This imposes a smoothness constraint on the embedding surface, removing the gradient incentive to latch onto high-frequency or high-contrast features. Together, L2 normalization and R1 regularization target distinct failure modes and are jointly necessary.       

> Generator
> Gz∼ N (0 ,1)
> Fake Image
> xfake
> Real Image
> xreal
> Embedding Network E
> Real Em-bedding
> zreal
> Fake Em-bedding
> zfake
> GiniCor Loss: (Min/Max)
> Update E
> Update G

Figure 2: Overview of the EmbeddGAN architecture. Both real and generated images are projected into a shared embedding space by the embedding network E. The Gini distance correlation compares the distributions of real and fake embeddings. 

# 4 Experimental Setup 

4.1 Datasets 

We choose to show viability of EmbeddGAN on three common datasets, the MNIST [24], CIFAR-10 [25], and CelebA [26] datasets. Each dataset was chosen to show the viability of EmbeddGAN on different types of image data and at different scales. The MNIST dataset contains 10 digit classes, and 28 × 28 grayscale images. CIFAR-10 consists of 32 × 32 color images with 10 distinct classes. CelebA faces contains over 200 , 000 celebrity images with 40 attribute annotations. For our experiments, we use the aligned and cropped version of CelebA, which consists of 178 × 218 

RGB images. We resize these images to 64 × 64 for training. 

4.2 Models for Comparison 

To evaluate the performance of EmbeddGAN, we compare it to three well-known GAN variants, DCGAN [2], Wasserstein GAN with gradient penalty (WGAN-GP) [27], and Spectral Norm GAN (SN-GAN) [22]. Each baseline was selected deliberately, not merely as a point of comparison, but because each shares a structural or conceptual relationship with EmbeddGAN. DCGAN serves as a foundational baseline. Both EmbeddGAN’s embedding network and DCGAN’s discriminator share the same convolutional backbone: stacked stride-2 Conv2d layers with LeakyReLU activations, followed by a final linear projection. This architectural similarity ensures that performance differences between the two models can be attributed to the training objective rather than to architectural capacity. WGAN-GP is included because its training objective pursues a similar goal to the Gini distance correlation: im-plicit distributional alignment between real and generated data. Where WGAN-GP measures this alignment via the Wasserstein distance enforced through a gradient penalty, EmbeddGAN measures it through statistical dependence in a learned embedding space. Comparing the two allows us to examine whether gCor offers a competitive alternative to Wasserstein-based objectives on these benchmarks. 6EmbeddGAN: A Novel GAN Framework Using an Embedding Network and Gini Distance Correlation SN-GAN is chosen because EmbeddGAN’s embedding network itself employs spectral normalization on its con-volutional and linear layers. Since spectral normalization is the defining characteristic of SN-GAN’s discriminator, including it as a baseline allows for a direct comparison between a model that applies spectral normalization in a classical adversarial setting and one that applies it within an embedding-based framework. To ensure a fair comparison, all three baselines share the same generator and discriminator architectures, differing only at the layer level: DCGAN includes batch normalization in the discriminator, while WGAN-GP and SN-GAN do not. SN-GAN replaces batch normalization with spectral normalization on all discriminator layers. 

4.3 Training Algorithm and Hyperparameters Algorithm 1 EmbeddGAN Training 

Require: Generator GθG , embedding network EθE (L2-normalised output) 

Require: Batch size m, latent dimension zd, embedding dimension n

Require: Learning rate η, Adam (β1, β 2)

Require: Embedding steps k, R1 coefficient γ

1: for epoch t = 1 , . . . , T do 

2: for each mini-batch xr ∼ pdata , |xr | = m do 

3: // Phase 1 — update embedding network ( k steps) 

4: Sample z ∼ N (0, I)m×zd

5: xf ← GθG (z) ▷ freeze θG; no gradient 6: for s = 1 , . . . , k do 

7: er ← EθE (xr ), ef ← EθE (xf )

8: Compute ρg(er , ef ) via Eqs. (4)–(6) 9: R1 ← 1

m

> m

X

> n=1

∇xrn

P 

> ℓ

EθE (xrn)ℓ

> 2

10: LE ← − ρg + γ

2 R1

11: θE ← Adam( θE , ∇θE LE , η, β 1, β 2)

12: end for 

13: // Phase 2 — update generator (1 step) 

14: Sample z ∼ N (0, I)m×zd

15: xf ← GθG (z) ▷ freeze θE

16: er ← EθE (xr ), ef ← EθE (xf )

17: LG ← ρg(er , ef )

18: θG ← Adam( θG, ∇θG LG, η, β 1, β 2)

19: end for 

20: end for 

EmbeddGAN alternates between two decoupled optimization phases per mini-batch, as summarized in Algorithm 1. Rather than the adversarial minimax game of standard GANs, the embedding network and generator pursue comple-mentary objectives with respect to the Gini distance correlation ρg : the embedding network is trained to maximize ρg ,increasing dependence between features and their labels, while the generator is trained to minimize ρg , decreasing this dependence by aligning the distributions of real and generated data in this embedding space. The embedding network applies L2 normalization to its outputs and is trained with R1 gradient regularization, as described in Section 3.2 All models were trained with the hyperparameters listed in Table 2. The same values were used across all three datasets except where noted. We set k = 1 (one embedding update per generator update) following preliminary experiments that showed no consistent benefit from higher values. For WGAN-GP, we set k = 5 following the original paper’s recommendation of multiple critic updates per generator update. 

4.4 Evaluation 

We evaluate the models using the Fréchet Inception Distance (FID) [28], a widely used metric for assessing the quality of generated images. FID measures the similarity between the distribution of real images and the distribution of generated images by comparing their statistics in the feature space of a pretrained Inception v3 network. Lower FID indicates greater similarity between the two distributions, reflecting both higher visual quality and greater diversity in generated samples. To compute the FID for each model, we use the clean-fid library [29]. Across the three datasets, well-trained GAN baselines typically achieve FID scores in the following ranges: on MNIST, scores below ∼20 are readily achievable, though FID is a less reliable indicator on this dataset due to the domain 7EmbeddGAN: A Novel GAN Framework Using an Embedding Network and Gini Distance Correlation Table 2: EmbeddGAN hyperparameters. Hyperparameter Value Epochs T 500 Latent dimension zd 100 Embedding dimension n 100 Learning rate η 2 × 10 −4

Adam β1 0.5 Adam β2 0.999 Batch size m (MNIST, CIFAR-10) 256 Batch size m (CelebA) 1024 Embedding steps k 1R1 coefficient γ 0.5 Table 3: Fréchet Inception Distance on the MNIST, CIFAR-10, and CelebA dataset at 500 epochs. Scores are computed over a sample size of 50000. Model MNIST ↓ CIFAR-10 ↓ CelebA ↓

EmbeddGAN 6.59 50 .89 32 .09 

DCGAN 6.63 41 .92 37 .30 

WGAN-GP 9.71 47 .66 30 .67 

SN-GAN 7.96 60 .87 23 .97 

mismatch between MNIST and the ImageNet-pretrained Inception v3 network [30]. On CIFAR-10, DCGAN, WGAN-GP, and SN-GAN can achieve FIDs in the range of approximately 14–55, with well tuned models typically falling between 21–40 [22, 28, 31]. On CelebA 64 ×64, DCGAN typically achieves FIDs of 13–65 depending on training strategy, WGAN-GP achieves 3–30, and SN-GAN achieves 10–30 depending on the architecture [28, 32]. We also compute the recall of the generated samples, which measures the diversity of the generated data by quantifying the fraction of real data modes that are covered by the generated distribution [33]. This is complementary to FID, which captures both quality and diversity but does not explicitly measure mode coverage. We use the pdrc library to compute recall [34], with k=5 and 10,000 samples per model, using 2048-d Inception-v3 pool features in place of VGG-16. 

4.5 Computing Resources 

All experiments were conducted on a workstation with an NVIDIA RTX A6000 GPU with 49GB of VRAM. The operating system was Debian 12, with CUDA 13.2 for GPU acceleration. All models were implemented using PyTorch 2.12.0. 

# 5 Results 

5.1 Quantitative Comparison 5.1.1 Fréchet Inception Distance Results 

Table 3 reports FID scores for all four models at epoch 500 across three datasets. On MNIST, EmbeddGAN ( 6.59 )and DCGAN ( 6.63 ) converge to near-identical performance, with SN-GAN ( 7.96 ) and WGAN-GP ( 9.71 ) trailing. For CIFAR-10, DCGAN leads with a score of 41 .92 ; WGAN-GP ( 47 .66 ) and EmbeddGAN ( 50 .89 ) are competitive, while SN-GAN ( 60 .87 ) underperforms. And on the CelebA dataset, SN-GAN achieves the lowest FID ( 23 .97 ), having continued to improve beyond epoch 300; WGAN-GP ( 30 .67 ) and EmbeddGAN ( 32 .09 ) are competitive, while DCGAN (37 .30 ) trails. Across all three datasets, no single model dominates; EmbeddGAN achieves competitive performance in each setting without specializing to any one dataset. 

5.1.2 Recall Results 

Table 4 reports Recall scores for all four models at epoch 500 across three datasets. On MNIST, EmbeddGAN achieves the highest recall ( 0.854 ), with DCGAN ( 0.844 ), WGAN-GP ( 0.824 ), and SN-GAN ( 0.819 ) trailing. For CIFAR-10, 8EmbeddGAN: A Novel GAN Framework Using an Embedding Network and Gini Distance Correlation Table 4: Recall on the MNIST, CIFAR-10, and CelebA dataset at 500 epochs. Scores are computed over a sample size of 10000. Model MNIST ↑ CIFAR-10 ↑ CelebA ↑

EmbeddGAN 0.854 0.469 0.352 

DCGAN 0.844 0.472 0.376 

WGAN-GP 0.824 0.483 0.495 

SN-GAN 0.819 0.328 0.471 EmbeddGAN WGAN-GP   

> SN-GAN DCGAN
> CelebA Epoch 500

Figure 3: Generated samples from EmbeddGAN, WGAN-GP, SN-GAN and DCGAN on CelebA at epoch 500. WGAN-GP leads with a recall of 0.483 ; DCGAN ( 0.472 ) and EmbeddGAN ( 0.469 ) are competitive, while SN-GAN (0.328 ) underperforms. And on the CelebA dataset, WGAN-GP achieves the highest recall ( 0.495 ), with SN-GAN (0.471 ) and DCGAN ( 0.376 ) trailing, and EmbeddGAN ( 0.352 ) with the lowest. 

5.2 Qualitative Comparison 

On CelebA, Fig. 3 shows randomly sampled outputs from all four models at epoch 500. EmbeddGAN produces recognizable, structurally coherent faces with consistent facial features and diversity in attributes such as hair color and expression, demonstrating that the gCor-based loss successfully drives the generator toward the real data distribution. A subset of samples shows desaturation relative to WGAN-GP and SN-GAN, we discuss possible causes of this in section 5.7. WGAN-GP and SN-GAN produce good outputs consistent with their strong FID scores, while DCGAN shows moderate sample-to-sample variation in color and sharpness. On the CIFAR-10 comparison shown in Fig. 4, EmbeddGAN performs well against all three baselines, showing good diversity and quality in the generated samples. 

5.3 Training Stability 

Fig. 5 shows FID score as a function of training epoch for each model on all three datasets. To manage the computational overhead of dense evaluation across training, FID is estimated using 5, 000 generated samples at each checkpoint rather than the standard 50 , 000 . On MNIST, EmbeddGAN reaches near-optimal FID by epoch 100 and remains consistently stable through epoch 500, never exhibiting a degraded checkpoint. DCGAN achieves a comparable final FID but shows occasional instability — most notably a spike to FID 25 at epoch 300 — before recovering by epoch 325. On CIFAR-10, EmbeddGAN starts as the second-weakest model but improves steadily throughout training, matching WGAN-GP by epoch 300 and maintaining parity through epoch 500, while DCGAN leads throughout. On CelebA, EmbeddGAN undergoes rapid improvement in the first 150 epochs, reducing FID from 62 to approximately 30 , before plateauing for the remainder of training. DCGAN exhibits substantial oscillation on CelebA throughout training, with epoch-to-epoch variance of up to 15 FID points. WGAN-GP converges steadily but reaches EmbeddGAN’s plateau only after epoch 400. 9EmbeddGAN: A Novel GAN Framework Using an Embedding Network and Gini Distance Correlation EmbeddGAN WGAN-GP  

> SN-GAN DCGAN
> CIFAR-10 Epoch 500

Figure 4: Generated samples from EmbeddGAN, WGAN-GP, SN-GAN and DCGAN on CIFAR-10 at epoch 500.   

> (a) MNIST (b) CIFAR-10 (c) CelebA

Figure 5: FID score vs. training epoch for EmbeddGAN, DCGAN, WGAN-GP, and SN-GAN on MNIST, CIFAR-10, and CelebA. Computed over a sample size of 5000 . Lower is better. EmbeddGAN maintains consistent stability on MNIST across all epochs and matches WGAN-GP on CIFAR-10 by epoch 300. DCGAN exhibits substantial oscillation on CelebA and occasional instability on MNIST. 

5.4 Loss Curve 

Fig. 6 shows the Gini distance correlation loss for the EmbeddGAN generator on all three datasets with L2 normalization and R1 regularization. In all cases, the loss spikes early as the embedding network learns to separate real from generated samples, then falls as the generator catches up. On MNIST, the loss drops from around 0.5 to a stable plateau near 0.2

by epoch 50 and stays there. On CIFAR-10, training is much noisier. The loss swings between near-zero and 0.45 for the first 70 epochs before settling around 0.25 –0.30 . There is also a brief collapse near epoch 270 where the loss drops to near zero before recovering. On CelebA, the loss settles around 0.45 –0.50 by epoch 25 but slowly drifts upward to around 0.55 –0.60 by epoch 300 , suggesting the embedding network continues to pull ahead on this more complex dataset, with the generator unable to fully close the gap. 

5.5 Ablation Studies 

This section provides quantitative evidence for three design claims: the necessity of joint L2/R1 regularization, the sensitivity of gCor to embedding dimensions, and the importance of balanced update dynamics. We perform our ablation studies using the CelebA dataset, as it is both the most generally complex and produces reasonably good images, as seen in Fig. 3. To verify that L2 normalization and R1 regularization each address the distinct failure modes described in Section 3.2, we computed the average 2D Fourier power spectrum over generated and real CelebA images across four regularization conditions. Fourier power spectrum analysis provides a frequency-domain view of the generated image statistics, allowing us to distinguish structured aliasing artifacts, which appear as periodic peaks, from the broadband spectral noise associated with shortcut exploitation. Fig. 7 shows that without any 10 EmbeddGAN: A Novel GAN Framework Using an Embedding Network and Gini Distance Correlation   

> (a) MNIST (b) CIFAR-10 (c) CelebA

Figure 6: Gini distance correlation loss curve for EmbeddGAN on MNIST, CIFAR-10, and CelebA. MNIST converges quickly to a stable plateau near 0.2. CIFAR-10 shows high early volatility before settling around 0.25 –0.30 , with a brief collapse near epoch 270 . CelebA stabilizes around 0.45 –0.50 but drifts upward through training, indicating the embedding network maintains a persistent advantage over the generator on the more complex dataset. 

Figure 7: Average 2D Fourier power spectrum of generated and real CelebA images during unregularized EmbeddGAN training. The generated spectrum exhibits a periodic grid of bright peaks at evenly spaced frequencies, characteristic of transposed convolution checkerboard aliasing. 

Figure 8: Adding L2 normalization alone eliminates the periodic grid of peaks, confirming that constraining embeddings to the unit hypersphere closes the aliasing shortcut. The generated spectrum remains noisy overall, however, with the difference map showing broadly distributed excess high-frequency energy, indicating that L2 suppresses the structural artifact but cannot align the generator’s output with the real spectral distribution. 11 EmbeddGAN: A Novel GAN Framework Using an Embedding Network and Gini Distance Correlation 

Figure 9: R1 regularization alone also eliminates the periodic grid, but via a different mechanism: penalizing gradients on real images removes the training incentive to exploit aliasing rather than constraining the embedding space. The spectrum remains unstructured, with excess high-frequency energy distributed throughout the difference map, mirroring the residual noise seen with L2 alone and indicating that neither component is sufficient on its own. 

Figure 10: Average 2D Fourier power spectrum of generated and real CelebA images after the introduction of L2 normalization and R1 regularization in EmbeddGAN at epoch 300. The periodic peaks observed in the generated spectrum are substantially reduced, indicating that the tiling artifacts have been mitigated. regularization, the generated spectrum contains a periodic grid of bright peaks at evenly-spaced frequencies, while the real image spectrum exhibits smooth radial decay consistent with natural image statistics. This pattern is characteristic of transposed convolution checkerboard aliasing, arising from uneven kernel overlap across the generator’s upsampling stages, and confirms the tiling artifact as an architectural property of the generator rather than a consequence of the training objective. Fig. 8 shows that adding L2 normalization alone significantly lessens the periodic grid by constraining the embedding space to the unit hypersphere, but the generated spectrum remains globally noisy, with the difference map showing broadly distributed excess high-frequency energy. Fig. 9 shows that R1 regularization alone also significantly lessens the periodic grid, this time by removing the gradient incentive to exploit aliasing, yet the spectrum remains similarly unstructured. That both components independently suppress the aliasing shortcut through different mechanisms, yet neither resolves the spectral mismatch alone, suggests the two play complementary roles. Fig. 10 confirms this: combining L2 normalization with R1 brings the generated spectrum closer to the real images, with the difference map reduced to near zero. 

5.5.1 Joint Necessity of L2 Normalization and R1 Regularization 

With the understanding that the exploitation visible in Fig. 7 is limited with the combination of both L2 normalization and R1 regularization, we examine the effect of the L2 normalization and R1 gradient regularization independently. We train four total models of EmbeddGAN, without L2/R1, with L2 without R1, without L2 with R1, and with both L2 and R1, for 300 epochs. We examine both qualitatively and quantitatively the results for comparison. Initially, we 12 EmbeddGAN: A Novel GAN Framework Using an Embedding Network and Gini Distance Correlation Table 5: Ablation study of EmbeddGAN on CelebA at epoch 300 over 50000 samples. Removing either regularization component leads to a substantial increase in FID; L2 normalization alone produces the worst result, as it forces the embedding network toward the contrast shortcut. Variant CelebA FID ↓

Full EmbeddGAN (L2 + R1) 29 .29 

R1 only, no L2 54 .29 

No L2, no R1 70 .22 

L2 only, no R1 179 .21   

> (a) No L2, no R1 (epoch 300) (b) L2 only, no R1 (epoch 300)
> (c) R1 only, no L2 (epoch 300) (d) L2 + R1 (epoch 300)

Figure 11: Generated CelebA samples showing the development of EmbeddGAN’s regularization strategy. (a) Without either component, the generator produces colorful tiling artifacts. (b) L2 alone resolves the magnitude shortcut, but the embedding network finds high-contrast regions as the next shortcut, causing contrast collapse. (c) R1 alone does not prevent the magnitude shortcut when embeddings are unbounded. (d) With both L2 and R1, both escape routes are closed, and the generator produces clean, diverse faces. remove both L2 normalization and R1 gradient regularization, resulting in a colorful tiling indicating mode collapse. Fig. 11(a) shows an example of this issue. We then add L2 normalization back to determine if it alone can fix the tiling issue. Fig. 11(b) shows these results, with high contrast images dominating, implying a shortcut has been found by the generator. Based on the Fourier power spectrums we previously examined, L2 alone closes the magnitude shortcut, but in doing so discovers another shortcut (the use of high contrast). Applying only R1 gradient regularization (Fig. 11(c)) shows a new, less regular instability occurs, but the faces that are shown are clearly sharper. Additionally, the high contrast shortcut discovered by L2 normalization is seemingly closed, implying that, to fix instability in this model, both techniques are required. Combining both L2 normalization and R1 gradient regularization, as shown in Fig. 11(d), results in consistent, sharp faces. Table 5 quantifies these outcomes on CelebA FID at epoch 300. Removing both components raises FID from 29 .29 to 

70 .22 . The most striking result is L2 alone, which produces the worst FID of 179 .21 , substantially higher than having no regularization at all. This is the counterintuitive consequence described above: closing the magnitude shortcut forces the embedding network toward the contrast shortcut, and the resulting collapse is more damaging than the unconstrained multi-shortcut behavior seen without either component. R1 alone ( 54 .29 ) provides meaningful improvement, but the remaining magnitude shortcut prevents the embedding network from measuring distributional overlap reliably. Together, L2 and R1 are complementary rather than redundant: each targets a distinct failure mode the other cannot address. 13 EmbeddGAN: A Novel GAN Framework Using an Embedding Network and Gini Distance Correlation Table 6: Ablation study of EmbeddGAN with varying embedding dimensions on CelebA at epoch 500 over 50000 

samples. Comparison n = 100 in bold. Embedding Dims CelebA FID ↓

1 411 .39 

3 28 .31 

5 27 .09 

10 29 .25 

50 39 .18 

100 32 .09 

1000 32 .29 

Figure 12: Qualitative comparison of generated CelebA samples from EmbeddGAN with varying embedding dimensions after 500 epochs. 

5.5.2 Ablation of Embedding Dimension 

Table 6 shows the FID scores for different embedding dimensions. A single embedding dimension ( n = 1 ) is insufficient, yielding a FID of 411 .39 on the CelebA dataset. The distributional signal collapsed to a scalar is too poor a proxy for the real/generated gap. Performance improves sharply at n = 3 (FID 28 .31 ) and peaks at n = 5 (FID 27 .09 ), indicating that even a very low-dimensional embedding space is sufficient to capture the distributional structure needed for gCor. Beyond this spot, FID degrades modestly: n = 10 scores 29 .25 , n = 50 scores 39 .18 , and n = 1000 scores 32 .29 . This U-shaped trend could suggest that very high dimensionality dilutes the gCor signal with noise. These results support using n ≥ 3 in practice, and motivate our default choice of n = 100 as a conservative choice well above the minimum threshold. Fig. 12 provides a qualitative comparison of generated CelebA samples from EmbeddGAN with varying embedding dimensions. Samples are generated randomly. As suggested by the FID scores, with n = 1 , the generator fails to learn meaningful structure producing random noise. At n ≥ 3 we can see dramatic improvement with recognizable faces being generated, supporting the lower FID values. Importantly, while n = 3 , n = 5 , and n = 10 produced better FID values, their qualitative results from Fig. 12 are not noticeably improved compared to our reference n = 100 .

5.5.3 Ablation of Embedding Steps per Generator Update 

Table 7 shows the FID scores for different numbers of embedding steps per generator update. Increasing the number of embedding network update steps ( k) per generator update consistently degrades performance. At k = 3 , FID is 43 .15 ;at k = 5 it rises to 47 .45 ; and at k = 10 it climbs to 131 .36 . This monotonic degradation suggests that over-training the 14 EmbeddGAN: A Novel GAN Framework Using an Embedding Network and Gini Distance Correlation Table 7: Ablation study of EmbeddGAN with varying embedding net steps per generator update on CelebA at epoch 300 over 50000 samples. k_steps CelebA FID ↓

1 29 .29 

3 43 .15 

5 47 .54 

10 131 .36 

embedding network relative to the generator creates an increasingly adversarial dynamic, where the embedding network pulls so far ahead that the gCor signal become uninformative or unstable for the generator. This mirrors the well-known instability observed in WGAN-GP when the critic-to-generator step ratio is pushed too high. The results motivate our default of k = 1 , which maintains a balanced update dynamic and achieves the best performance in our experiments. As shown in Fig. 13, with k = 1 , the generator produces recognizable, diverse faces. At k = 3 , the quality degrades with more blurring and less diversity. At k = 5 , the samples seem to continue to degrade with some recognizable faces. Setting k = 10 severely degrades the quality, the generator fails to learn meaningful structure, producing mostly noise and blurry faces. This qualitative degradation is consistent with the FID scores and supports the conclusion that a balanced update dynamic with k = 1 is crucial for stable and effective training in EmbeddGAN. 

Figure 13: Qualitative comparison of generated CelebA samples from EmbeddGAN with varying numbers of embedding steps per generator update after 300 epochs. 

5.6 Visualizing the Embedding Space 

One of the key advantages of EmbeddGAN’s embedding-based framework is the ability to directly visualize the learned embedding space and the separation between real and generated distributions. Fig. 14 visualizes the embedding space learned by the embedding network on CelebA using t-SNE [35]. At epoch 1, real and generated embeddings are intermixed with no discernible structure, reflecting the random initialization of the embedding network before any meaningful training signal has propagated. By epoch 25, the two distributions have separated into distinct curved manifolds in the projected space, and by epoch 100 this separation is maintained. This separation is the direct objective of the embedding network: by maximizing gCor, the embedding network is incentivized to find projections that make the real and generated distributions statistically distinguishable. The curved manifold structure, rather than tight point clusters, suggests a distributed representation capturing diversity within each distribution rather than collapsing to a single mode. This rapid separation by epoch 25 is consistent with EmbeddGAN’s fast initial FID improvement on CelebA observed in Fig. 5. 

5.7 Limitations 

EmbeddGAN exhibits a mean-seeking failure mode in late training on CelebA, where generated images progressively lose color saturation and converge toward a gray average. We hypothesize that R1 regularization, applied at every training step over hundreds of epochs, cumulatively compresses the sensitivity of the embedding network, producing 15 EmbeddGAN: A Novel GAN Framework Using an Embedding Network and Gini Distance Correlation 

Figure 14: Visualization of the EmbeddGAN embedding space on CelebA using t-SNE at epochs 1, 25, 100, and 300. At epoch 1, real and generated embeddings are intermixed with no discernible structure. By epoch 25, the two distributions have separated into distinct curved manifolds in the projected space, and this separation is maintained at epoch 100 and 300, providing a persistent distributional signal for gCor to measure. an increasingly tight embedding cluster for real images. As this cluster tightens, the gradient signal available to the generator diminishes, and the generator drifts toward the cluster mean rather than the full distribution. Reducing 

R1_GAMMA from 10 .0 to 0.5 reduced its severity, suggesting that the aggressiveness of regularization is the primary driver. Lazy regularization, computing the R1 penalty every N steps rather than every step, as used in StyleGAN2 [36], remains a candidate fix for this failure mode. 

# 6 Conclusion 

This paper presented EmbeddGAN, a novel GAN training framework that replaces the traditional discriminator with an embedding network trained via Gini distance correlation (gCor). By recasting the adversarial objective as a minimax problem over a learned embedding space, where the embedding network maximizes gCor and the generator minimizes it, EmbeddGAN grounds GAN training in a statistically formal measure of distributional dependence with a clear convergence condition: gCor equals zero if and only if the real and generated distributions are indistinguishable in the learned embedding space. Experiments on MNIST, CIFAR-10, and CelebA demonstrated that EmbeddGAN achieves competitive FID scores against DCGAN, WGAN-GP, and SN-GAN across all three datasets, while exhibiting notably more stable training dynamics than DCGAN on CelebA. Ablation studies revealed that L2 normalization and R1 gradient regularization are jointly necessary to prevent distinct failure modes, magnitude exploitation, and high-contrast shortcuts that arise when the embedding network is unconstrained. These results suggest that binary classification is not the only viable adversarial signal; dependence-based objectives in learned embedding spaces offer a promising alternative, though their success depends critically on regularizing the embedding network to prevent shortcut solutions. 16 EmbeddGAN: A Novel GAN Framework Using an Embedding Network and Gini Distance Correlation 

# References 

[1] I. J. Goodfellow, J. Pouget-Abadie, M. Mirza, B. Xu, D. Warde-Farley, S. Ozair, A. Courville, and Y. Bengio, “Generative Adversarial Networks,” Jun. 2014. [2] A. Radford, L. Metz, and S. Chintala, “Unsupervised Representation Learning with Deep Convolutional Generative Adversarial Networks,” Jan. 2016. [3] T. Karras, S. Laine, and T. Aila, “A Style-Based Generator Architecture for Generative Adversarial Networks,” Mar. 2019. [4] T. Salimans, I. Goodfellow, W. Zaremba, V. Cheung, A. Radford, and X. Chen, “Improved Techniques for Training GANs,” Jun. 2016. [5] M. Shateri, F. Messina, F. Labeau, and P. Piantanida, “Preserving Privacy in GANs Against Membership Inference Attack,” Nov. 2023. [6] D. Saxena and J. Cao, “Generative Adversarial Networks (GANs): Challenges, Solutions, and Future Directions,” 

ACM Computing Surveys , vol. 54, no. 3, pp. 1–42, Apr. 2022. [7] M. Mirza and S. Osindero, “Conditional Generative Adversarial Nets,” Nov. 2014. [8] J. Lee, Y. Min, H. Kim, and S. Ahn, “DAFT-GAN: Dual Affine Transformation Generative Adversarial Network for Text-Guided Image Inpainting,” Aug. 2024. [9] T. R. Shaham, T. Dekel, and T. Michaeli, “SinGAN: Learning a Generative Model From a Single Natural Image,” in 2019 IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer Vision (ICCV) . Seoul, Korea (South): IEEE, Oct. 2019, pp. 4569–4579. [10] J.-Y. Zhu, T. Park, P. Isola, and A. A. Efros, “Unpaired Image-to-Image Translation Using Cycle-Consistent Adversarial Networks,” in 2017 IEEE International Conference on Computer Vision (ICCV) . Venice: IEEE, Oct. 2017, pp. 2242–2251. [11] K. Li, S. Yang, T. M. Sullivan, R. S. Burd, and I. Marsic, “ProcessGAN: Generating Privacy-Preserving Time-Aware Process Data with Conditional Generative Adversarial Nets,” ACM Transactions on Knowledge Discovery from Data , vol. 18, no. 9, pp. 1–31, Nov. 2024. [12] M. Arjovsky and L. Bottou, “Towards Principled Methods for Training Generative Adversarial Networks,” Jan. 2017. [13] M. Arjovsky, S. Chintala, and L. Bottou, “Wasserstein Generative Adversarial Networks,” in Proceedings of the 34th International Conference on Machine Learning . PMLR, Jul. 2017, pp. 214–223. [14] S. Zhang, X. Dang, D. Nguyen, D. Wilkins, and Y. Chen, “Estimating Feature-Label Dependence Using Gini Distance Statistics,” IEEE Transactions on Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence , vol. 43, no. 6, pp. 1947– 1963, Jun. 2021. [15] C.-L. Li, W.-C. Chang, Y. Cheng, Y. Yang, and B. Póczos, “Mmd gan: Towards deeper understanding of moment matching network,” Advances in neural information processing systems , vol. 30, 2017. [16] J. Donahue, P. Krähenbühl, and T. Darrell, “Adversarial feature learning,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1605.09782 , 2016. [17] V. Dumoulin, I. Belghazi, B. Poole, O. Mastropietro, A. Lamb, M. Arjovsky, and A. Courville, “Adversarially Learned Inference,” Feb. 2017. [18] A. Blum, “Random Projection, Margins, Kernels, and Feature-Selection,” in Subspace, Latent Structure and Feature Selection , C. Saunders, M. Grobelnik, S. Gunn, and J. Shawe-Taylor, Eds. Berlin, Heidelberg: Springer Berlin Heidelberg, 2006, vol. 3940, pp. 52–68. [19] A. Rahimi and B. Recht, “Random Features for Large-Scale Kernel Machines,” in Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , vol. 20. Curran Associates, Inc., 2007. [20] B. Neyshabur, S. Bhojanapalli, and A. Chakrabarti, “Stabilizing GAN Training with Multiple Random Projections,” Jun. 2018. [21] G. Bhattacharya, J. Monteiro, J. Alam, and P. Kenny, “Generative Adversarial Speaker Embedding Networks for Domain Robust End-to-end Speaker Verification,” in ICASSP 2019 - 2019 IEEE International Conference on Acoustics, Speech and Signal Processing (ICASSP) . Brighton, United Kingdom: IEEE, May 2019, pp. 6226–6230. [22] T. Miyato, T. Kataoka, M. Koyama, and Y. Yoshida, “Spectral Normalization for Generative Adversarial Networks,” Feb. 2018. 17 EmbeddGAN: A Novel GAN Framework Using an Embedding Network and Gini Distance Correlation [23] L. Mescheder, A. Geiger, and S. Nowozin, “Which Training Methods for GANs do actually Converge?” in 

Proceedings of the 35th International Conference on Machine Learning . PMLR, Jul. 2018, pp. 3481–3490. [24] Li Deng, “The MNIST Database of Handwritten Digit Images for Machine Learning Research [Best of the Web],” 

IEEE Signal Processing Magazine , vol. 29, no. 6, pp. 141–142, Nov. 2012. [25] A. Krizhevsky and G. Hinton, “Learning multiple layers of features from tiny images,” 2009. [26] Z. Liu, P. Luo, X. Wang, and X. Tang, “Deep Learning Face Attributes in the Wild,” 2014. [27] I. Gulrajani, F. Ahmed, M. Arjovsky, V. Dumoulin, and A. Courville, “Improved Training of Wasserstein GANs,” Dec. 2017. [28] M. Heusel, H. Ramsauer, T. Unterthiner, B. Nessler, and S. Hochreiter, “GANs Trained by a Two Time-Scale Update Rule Converge to a Local Nash Equilibrium,” Jan. 2018. [29] G. Parmar, R. Zhang, and J.-Y. Zhu, “On Aliased Resizing and Surprising Subtleties in GAN Evaluation,” 2021. [30] K. Shmelkov, C. Schmid, and K. Alahari, “How good is my GAN?” in Proceedings of the European Conference on Computer Vision (ECCV) , 2018, pp. 213–229. [31] M. Lucic, K. Kurach, M. Michalski, S. Gelly, and O. Bousquet, “Are GANs Created Equal? A Large-Scale Study,” in Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , vol. 31. Curran Associates, Inc., 2018. [32] H. Zhang, Z. Zhang, A. Odena, and H. Lee, “Consistency regularization for generative adversarial networks,” 

arXiv preprint arXiv:1910.12027 , 2019. [33] T. Kynkäänniemi, T. Karras, S. Laine, J. Lehtinen, and T. Aila, “Improved Precision and Recall Metric for Assessing Generative Models,” in Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , vol. 32. Curran Associates, Inc., 2019. [34] M. F. Naeem, S. J. Oh, Y. Uh, Y. Choi, and J. Yoo, “Reliable fidelity and diversity metrics for generative models,” in International Conference on Machine Learning . PMLR, 2020, pp. 7176–7185. [35] L. Van der Maaten and G. Hinton, “Visualizing data using t-SNE.” Journal of machine learning research , vol. 9, no. 11, 2008. [36] T. Karras, S. Laine, M. Aittala, J. Hellsten, J. Lehtinen, and T. Aila, “Analyzing and Improving the Image Quality of StyleGAN,” Mar. 2020. 18