Title: Hallucination Early Detection in Diffusion Models

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2604.20354v1

Published Time: Thu, 23 Apr 2026 00:47:00 GMT

Number of Pages: 21

Markdown Content:
# Hallucination Early Detection in Diffusion Models 

# Federico Betti 1* †, Lorenzo Baraldi 2†, Lorenzo Baraldi 3, Rita Cucchiara 3,Nicu Sebe 11* University of Trento, Italy. 

2Universit` a di Pisa, Italy. 

3University of Modena and Reggio Emilia, Italy. *Corresponding author(s). E-mail(s): federico.betti@unitn.it; Contributing authors: lorenzo.baraldi@phd-unipi.it; lorenzo.baraldi@unimore.it; rita.cucchiara@unimore.it; nicu.sebe@unitn.it; 

†These authors contributed equally to this work. 

Abstract 

Text-to-Image generation has seen significant advancements in output realism with the advent of dif-fusion models. However, diffusion models encounter difficulties when tasked with generating multiple objects, frequently resulting in hallucinations where certain entities are omitted. While existing solu-tions typically focus on optimizing latent representations within diffusion models, the relevance of the initial generation seed is typically underestimated. While using various seeds in multiple iterations can improve results, this method also significantly increases time and energy costs. To address this chal-lenge, we introduce HEaD+ (Hallucination Early Detection +), a novel approach designed to identify incorrect generations early in the diffusion process. The HEaD+ framework integrates cross-attention maps and textual information with a novel input, the Predicted Final Image. The objective is to assess whether to proceed with the current generation or restart it with a different seed, thereby exploring multiple-generation seeds while conserving time. HEaD+ is trained on the newly created InsideGen dataset of 45,000 generated images, each containing prompts with up to seven objects. Our findings demonstrate a 6-8% increase in the likelihood of achieving a complete generation ( i.e. an image accu-rately representing all specified subjects) with four objects when applying HEaD+ alongside existing models. Additionally, HEaD+ reduces generation times by up to 32% when aiming for a complete 

image, enhancing the efficiency of generating complete and accurate object representations relative to leading models. Moreover, we propose an integrated localization module that predicts object centroid positions and verifies pairwise spatial relations (if requested by the users) at an intermediate timestep, gating generation together with object presence to further improve relation-consistent outcomes. 

Keywords: Diffusion Models, Image Generation Evaluation 

# 1 Introduction 

The advent of diffusion models (Ho, Jain, & Abbeel, 2020; Sohl-Dickstein, Weiss, Mah-eswaranathan, & Ganguli, 2015) (DMs) and their latent variants (Rombach, Blattmann, Lorenz, Esser, & Ommer, 2022) has significantly enhanced the fidelity and alignment of generated content with user-provided context (Dhariwal & Nichol, 2021). Nonetheless, these models continue to face 1

> arXiv:2604.20354v1 [cs.CV] 22 Apr 2026

Fig. 1 : a) Proportion of complete generations, i.e. images featuring all requested objects, as a func-tion of the number of objects requested in the prompt (InsideGen dataset). b) Summary of the HEaD+ pipeline: throughout the generation process, HEaD+ evaluates whether all specified objects will be cor-rectly depicted in the final image, determining whether to proceed with the current generation or restart with a different seed. challenges in faithfully representing the requested prompts. For instance, when a prompt specifies multiple objects, there is a considerable probabil-ity that not all objects will be accurately depicted, resulting in an incomplete generation (Agarwal et al., 2023; Chefer, Alaluf, Vinker, Wolf, & Cohen-Or, 2023; Z. Wang, Sha, Ding, Wang, & Tu, 2024). These inaccuracies are problematic for both users, who may not receive the intended content, and for companies, as the production of erroneous images results in wasted computational resources and energy. Furthermore, diffusion models have exhib-ited subpar performance in generating “long-tail” objects (Zhang, Kang, Hooi, Yan, & Feng, 2023), often misrepresenting rare concepts in the generated images (Samuel, Ben-Ari, Raviv, Dar-shan, & Chechik, 2023). This challenge has led researchers to explore the influence of initial seeds on the generation process, investigating their effects and developing criteria for their optimal selection (Samuel et al., 2023). Since different seeds can produce varying results, selecting the appropriate seed could significantly mitigate both the long-tail issue and the problem of hallucina-tions. In our study, we assess the performance of Sta-ble Diffusion v1.4 (SD1.4) and Stable Diffusion v2 (SD2) (Rombach et al., 2022) when tasked with generating images from prompts that request the presence of a different number of objects. Our analysis reveals that the probability of a complete 

generation – i.e. an image showing all requested objects – with four objects is only 26.96% for SD1.4 and improves to 30.61% for SD2, as illus-trated in Fig. 1(a). The effectiveness of an image generation diffusion model depends strongly on the choice of the initial seed, which establishes the starting latent noise and guides the model through the latent space (Chefer et al., 2023; Karthik, Roth, Mancini, & Akata, 2023; Liu, Li, Du, Torralba, & Tenenbaum, 2022a; Samuel, Ben-Ari, Darshan, Maron, & Chechik, 2024; Wu et al., 2023). This aspect is underlined by our results: in scenarios with four objects, at least one among the 11 seeds we tested leads to a com-plete generation in 79.87% of the prompts. This significant increase highlights the central role of seed selection in overcoming the unpredictabil-ity and variability associated with these models, indicating substantial opportunities for improving generative accuracy. While some attempts have been made to develop automatic evaluation metrics for image generation (Betti et al., 2023; Lu, Yang, Li, Wang, & Wang, 2024), these still fail at ensuring a suffi-ciently fast and reliable evaluation. Further, even in the presence of a reliable assessment of the gen-erated image, the generation process should be 2repeated different times until reaching a complete 

generation. In this paper, we instead take a differ-ent path and explore solutions for an early ( i.e. ,at early stages of the diffusion process) detection of hallucination. We use this in combination with a procedure to abort or restart generation with another seed to save time and improve the final quality. To this aim, we focus on specific hallu-cinations: the omission in the generated image of one or more target objects requested in the textual prompt. Our approach, termed HEaD+ , or Halluci-nation Early Detection+, is the first approach designed to enhance both the efficiency and accu-racy of generative DMs. HEaD+ leverages inter-mediate cross-attention maps and textual infor-mation to assess the connection between the input prompt and the internal attention operations of the model. Further, HEaD+ operates on the Pre-dicted Final Image (PFI), which denotes a forecast of the final generated image at a specific time step of the generation process. The combination of PFIs and cross-attention maps allows for the early identification of potential errors by predict-ing the inclusion or exclusion of objects requested by the initial prompt. This proactive error iden-tification allows HEaD+ to suggest terminating the diffusion process early, thereby optimizing resource usage and reducing the time spent on generating images that are unlikely to meet qual-ity standards. In addition to object presence, we equip HEaD+ with a localization module that, when enabled, predicts object centroid positions to verify simple pairwise relations ( e.g. left/right, above/below) when specified in the prompt. Ulti-mately, this decision is combined with presence predictions to determine whether to continue or restart generation. HEaD+ is developed through the training of an Hallucination Prediction (HP) network on a dataset featuring both accurate and hallucinated images. Specifically, we generate InsideGen , a dataset that encompasses 45,000 images generated with SD1.4 (Rombach et al., 2022) and SD2, sav-ing cross-attention maps and PFIs at intermediate steps. Leveraging on this dataset, HEaD+ detec-tor is designed to integrate seamlessly with all existing DMs, enhancing their ability to reliably produce images that depict all requested objects. This improvement is evident when HEaD+ is applied to SD1.4 and TokenCompose (Z. Wang et al., 2024), even with datasets and prompt cat-egories that are entirely different from those in InsideGen. A preliminary exploration of hallucination detection was previously conducted in (Betti, Baraldi, Baraldi, Cucchiara, & Sebe, 2024), where we tackled hallucinations in a more controlled scenario involving two subjects. However, when applied to a more complex experimental set-ting, the previous model exhibited limited effi-ciency, achieving only 11.55% time savings. In contrast, this work introduces a more sophisti-cated dataset, InsideGen, featuring complex and realistic prompts. Further, we improve model per-formance by changing the overall architecture of the HP network to incorporate the textual infor-mation associated with hallucinated objects and by better combining intermediate information. 

Contributions. To sum up, our main contribu-tions are as follows: 

• We propose HEaD+, a novel framework designed to assess the presence of objects in images during the generation process. This opens the way to predicting aspects of the final output in mid-generation, with poten-tial benefits on the entire image generation pipeline using diffusion models. 

• Our approach is based on a new indicator for the early detection of objects in the gen-erated images, the Predicted Final Image. Moreover, it employs an Hallucination Pre-diction network that combines PFI, cross-attention maps, and textual embeddings via a Transformer Decoder approach. This net-work is model-agnostic, i.e. it can be added to any diffusion models without the need for re-training. 

• Our experimental findings show that using HEaD+ in combination with SD1.4 or Token-Compose improves the probability of accu-rately generating an image from a four-object prompt by 7.85% and 6.52%, respectively. 

• As a complimentary contribution, we build and release the InsideGen dataset, which annotates hallucinations and records cross-attention maps and PFIs at various stages of 3the generation. InsideGen dataset is available for download on the project page 1.

# 2 Related Works 

Text-to-Image Generation Evaluation. Eval-uating the alignment between a generated image and its initial prompt remains a challenging task, with no universally accepted solutions currently available. Among the assessment metrics, CLIP-Score (Hessel, Holtzman, Forbes, Bras, & Choi, 2021) evaluates the cosine similarity between the prompt and the image, both having undergone processing through their respective visual and textual CLIP backbones (Radford et al., 2021). On the other hand, Betti et al. (2023) have introduced a novel scoring mechanism that har-nesses the capabilities of Large Language Models (LLMs) and Visual Question Answering. Consis-tent with this research direction, several other investigations (Hu et al., 2023; Ku, Jiang, Wei, Yue, & Chen, 2023; Lu et al., 2024; Singh & Zheng, 2023) propose diverse methodologies, framing their research within the common rea-soning paradigm advanced by LLMs. Addition-ally, the use of Visual Question Answering in the context of text-to-image evaluation has been separately explored by Z. Lin et al. (2024). While these methods have demonstrated their proficiency in highlighting the hallucinatory aspects of generative models, they still require the generated image as input, which is produced only in the final step of the diffusion process. More-over, they include additional processing beyond the generation phase, thus introducing delays in the overall evaluation due to the utilization of foundational models in the evaluation pipeline. In contrast, HEaD+ enables the detection of hallu-cinations during the generative process, thereby preventing the creation of images that are incon-sistent with their respective prompts. 

Attention Maps for Image Generation. The integration of attention mechanisms has been a cornerstone in improving image synthesis. Cross-attention layers (Rombach et al., 2022) have significantly improved visual fidelity, a concept further explored by Hertz et al. (2022) to main-tain coherence between text prompts and visual 

> 1Project page available at: aimagelab.github.io/HEaD

outputs. The role of semantic layouts in image synthesis has also been emphasized for quality and interpretability (W. Wang et al., 2022). Extend-ing these concepts, Rassin et al. (2024) tackled linguistic binding in diffusion models with their SynGen approach, which aligns attention maps with prompt syntax to improve attribute cor-respondence, optimizing the generation process without retraining the model. Mao, Wang, and Aizawa (2023) introduced a novel method of con-trolling image synthesis by editing initial noise images, revealing that pixel blocks in initial latent images can be manipulated to influence a specific content generation. Balaji et al. (2022) proposed eDiff-I, an ensemble of expert denoisers for text-to-image diffusion models, which enhances text alignment and visual quality by specializing mod-els for different synthesis stages. Concurrently, PixArt-α (J. Chen et al., 2024) introduces aTransformer-based diffusion model that integrates text via cross-attention into a Diffusion Trans-former (DiT) Peebles and Xie (2023), employs a decomposed training strategy, and leverages dense pseudo-captioning, improving image quality up to 1024px with markedly reduced training costs. Cross-attention maps have been also employed for correcting missing-object problems in image generation. For instance, TokenCom-pose (Z. Wang et al., 2024) proposes to fine-tune the Diffusion U-Net by enforcing consistencies between cross-attention maps and relative object segmentation maps. Attend-and-Excite (Chefer et al., 2023) refines the latent embedding on the fly, by maximizing the cross-attention acti-vation for the most neglected subject. Further, cross-attention maps have been found relevant for enhancing binding between represented sub-jects and their properties (Li, Keuper, Zhang, & Khoreva, 2023). Similarly, Agarwal et al. (2023), proposes an attention segregation loss to reduce the overlap of different concepts. In contrast, Structured Diffusion (Feng et al., 2023) adjusts cross-attention representations by exploiting linguistic structures, thus exhibiting enhanced proficiency in the generation of images with complex compositional semantics. Layout Guidance (M. Chen, Laina, & Vedaldi, 2024) introduces a methodology to direct the image generation process by optimizing cross-attention maps in alignment with a predefined layout. 4Furthermore, Composable Diffusion (Liu, Li, Du, Torralba, & Tenenbaum, 2022b) adopts a novel approach by segmenting the prompt into distinct conditions and applying a score-based mechanism to refine the image quality. Following the consensus on the effectiveness of cross-attention as a telltale sign of the fidelity of the generation, our work exploits this information as a factor for predicting the likelihood of accurate generation from early diffusion steps. 

Seed Importance in Image Generation. In text-to-image generation, images are significantly impacted by the starting seed of the diffusion process. Indeed, different seeds can produce com-pletely different images, as highlighted by Karthik et al. (2023), which claims to generate better-aligned images by evaluating multiple seeds. Fur-thermore, (Mao et al., 2023; Samuel et al., 2024) propose to edit the image by manipulating the ini-tial noise instead of steering the generation process with additional mechanisms. Seed selection has gained relevance in the gen-eration of long-tail concepts (Zhang et al., 2023). As underlined by Samuel et al. (2023), in the gen-eration of rare subjects, training predominantly involves exposure to a limited segment of the ini-tial noisy latent space. This selective exposure during training contributes to the generation of unsatisfactory outcomes across a majority of gen-erative seeds at inference time. Hence, the explo-ration of diverse generative seeds remains a critical aspect in enhancing generative outcomes. To mit-igate the occurrence of hallucinations, HEaD+ suggests altering the seed in the event of detecting hallucinations in the generative process. 

# 3 Preliminaries 

In this section, we provide a detailed explanation of latent diffusion models, noise scheduling, and text conditioning, providing the background on relevant definitions and notations. 

Latent Diffusion Models. In this study, we examine the Stable Diffusion (SD) architec-ture (Rombach et al., 2022), which performs the diffusion process over a latent space of a varia-tional autoencoder decoder (Kingma & Welling, 2014) instead of the traditional pixel image space. Initially, an encoder E converts an image x into a latent code z = E(x). The decoder D seeks to achieve precise reconstruction, ensuring that 

D(E(x)) ≈ x. Within this framework, a denois-ing diffusion probabilistic model (DDPM) (Ho et al., 2020; Sohl-Dickstein et al., 2015) operates. This model works on the latent space, creat-ing a denoised version of the input latent zt at each timestep t. Significantly, the procedure is improved by the inclusion of a conditioning vec-tor c(y), usually obtained from a textual prompt y

using a CLIP text encoder (Radford et al., 2021). The final training objective consists of mini-mizing the following loss function: 

L = Ez∼E(x),y,ϵ ∼N (0 ,1) ,t ∥ϵ − ϵθ (zt, t, c (y)) ∥2 ,

(1) where ϵθ is a UNet network (Ronneberger, Fischer, & Brox, 2015), with attention layers, that aims to predict the added noise ϵ.To obtain the final image from the denoised latent representation, the last step involves pass-ing the final latent representation through a the decoder D. This decoder translates the latent space back into the pixel space, thus completing the image generation process. The transition from the final latent state z0 to the generated image x0

can thus be described by 

x0 = D(z0). (2) For further details, we refer the reader to (Rom-bach et al., 2022). 

Schedulers in Diffusion Models. In diffusion models, schedulers are used to manage the denois-ing process, guiding image generation by adjusting noise levels throughout the steps. These algo-rithms facilitate the transition from a noisy latent representation to a refined image without adver-sarial training. In our HEaD+ approach, we have adapted the scheduler’s function to extract the PFI at intermediate diffusion steps. This adjust-ment is designed to obtain the most precise repre-sentation of the final image during the generation process. The transition of latents zt at time step t to a subsequent state zt′ is governed by the following procedure. The predicted noise ϵt is firstly esti-mated from the output of the UNet model, and the updated latents zt′ are computed through the 5update function of the scheduler ∆, as 

ϵt = ϵθ (zt, t )

zt′ = ∆( zt, ϵ t, t, t ′). (3) In this formulation, ϵt is derived by the current latents and time step, while ∆ is the sched-uler update function computing the new latents 

zt′ based on the predicted noise ϵt. The specific characteristics of ∆ depend on the chosen sched-uler, which ultimately determines the intricate dynamics of the denoising process. 

Text-Conditioning via Cross-Attention. Sta-ble Diffusion (Rombach et al., 2022) employs cross-attention for text guidance. Indeed, the UNet incorporates self-attention followed by cross-attention layers, functioning across different res-olutions (ranging from 64 to 8). For each spatial dimension P of the feature map and text tokens N

extracted from y, an attention map At ∈ RP ×P ×N

is formed, influencing the interaction between text tokens and spatial regions of the image. The atten-tion map extraction for a specific object o, given its index in the prompt, io, and the latent rep-resentation zt at time t, can be expressed as 

Ao,t = a( io, z t), (4) where Ao,t denotes the attention map associated with the object o at timestep t, extracted from the latent representation zt.

# 4 Hallucination Early Detection+ 

The primary goal of HEaD+ is to detect and pre-emptively interrupt faulty generative processes. Our approach is designed to verify the consis-tency between the input textual guidance and the expected output during the diffusion image gen-eration process to save computational time and ensure correct generation. A distinctive feature of our approach is its capability to conduct this ver-ification at a specific intermediate timestep of the diffusion pipeline. To this aim, we designed an Hal-lucination Prediction (HP) network to detect the risk of hallucination. If an hallucination risk is pre-dicted, our approach forces the generation process to restart using a different initial seed that might lead to better results. In the following, we illus-trate the proposed HEaD+ approach at inference time to streamline the generation process and, as a result, enable automatic quality assessment of the final output. 

# 4.1 Multi-modal Inputs Extraction 

Consider a prompt y that includes a set of tar-get objects O to be represented in the image. The procedure for identifying these target objects from the prompt is defined as follows: 

O = TOE( y), (5) where TOE( ·) denotes the Target Object Extrac-tion function. In this context, the term “objects” pertains to words in the prompt that correspond directly to visible elements in the image. For these elements, the associated cross-attention maps will be derived. Although the current method is pri-marily focused on objects, it is designed to be extensible to encompass a broader range of visual concepts, such as attributes or colors, going beyond the limits of object-based extraction. We then define the critical timestep , denoted as 

T , as a specific step in the diffusion process where cross-attention maps for each object ( AO, T ) and the Predicted Final Image (PFI T ) are extracted. In particular, for each object o ∈ O, the cross-attention map Ao, T is obtained by applying the function a(·), as described in Eq. 4. PFI T , instead, represents the prediction of the expected outcome at the end of the generation process, using only information available at timestep T . In particular, the scheduler projects the latents at T to the final step, and the decoder translates these predicted latents into the image space. Formally, this process can be defined as follows: 

ϵT = ϵθ (zT , T )

zT 

> 0

= ∆( zT , ϵ T , T , 0) PFI T = D(zT 

> 0

),

(6) where ϵT represents the predictive noise obtained from the UNet model at critical timestep T . The function ∆ updates the latents zT to the pre-dicted latents at the final timestep, denoted as zT 

> 0

.Finally, the decoder D translates these predicted final latents into the Predicted Final Image, PFI T ,which represents a global snapshot at the given timestep and is utilized for predictions across all specified objects. 6Fig. 2 : Overview of the HEaD+ process and detail of the Hallucination Prediction network. The process starts with extracting subjects from the prompt using the TOE model. At timestep T of the diffusion process, cross-attention maps and PFI are produced. HP network processes all inputs using specific feature extractors, and combines them using a Transformer-based decoder to predict whether generation should continue or not. As an additional input for the model, we extract an embedding vector for each object. This vector is produced using CLIP (Radford et al., 2021) from the text of the requested objects extracted from the prompt y. Specifically, for each object, we have vo = CLIP Text (yo) obtained by applying the CLIP model to the textual represen-tation yo of each object. Examples of PFIs extracted at different timesteps are shown in Fig. 3. PFI T , the atten-tion maps AO, T and the textual embeddings vO ,enable the HP network to meticulously assess and predict the presence of specified objects in the final generated image, ensuring a coherent and accurate output aligned with the initial textual guidance. 

# 4.2 Hallucination Prediction Network 

At a specific timestep T of the generation, the Hallucination Prediction network evaluates each object o ∈ O individually, utilizing the corre-sponding cross-attention map Ao, T , the textual embedding vector vo, and the Predicted Final Image, PFI T , as inputs. Subsequently, the network generates a binary output that indicates whether the target object is present or absent in the final image. Formally, the process can be written as 

Ho = HP( Ao, PFI T , v o), (7) where Ho is the binary prediction for object o.An image is considered complete if ∀o ∈ O, H o =1, otherwise, at inference time, the process must restart with a different seed. The HP architecture consists of a Trans-former model with cross-attention layers that inte-grate the three input streams (PFI T , Ao, T , vo)through self-attention and cross-attention mecha-nisms. Initially, all streams are elaborated sepa-rately. Indeed, the PFI is subjected to processing via the visual CLIP backbone, with the extrac-tion of features from the last attention layer. This is followed by the concatenation of the tex-tual token vo to this sequence. Simultaneously, a three-layer convolutional network, processes the cross-attention map. Following these operations, both outputs are adjusted to the embedding dimension of the trans-former model, predetermined at 192, by employing 1D convolution. This process sets the stage for the application of a self-attention mechanism on the stream derived from the CLIP processing This result (acting as the query) is integrated with a cross-attention layer with the features from the 7cross-attention maps (serving as keys and values). Skip connections are added following the architec-ture of the Transformer decoder (Vaswani et al., 2017). This attention block is consistently applied 12 times, concluding with a classification head that takes as input the activation corresponding to the first element of the input sequence, i.e. vo.The model architecture is shown in Fig. 2. Throughout the training phase, the visual and textual backbones of CLIP are kept frozen. This approach guarantees substantial generaliza-tion capabilities towards objects not present in the training dataset, thereby accommodating applica-tions on different datasets and scenarios. 

# 4.3 Localization Module for Spatial Relations 

In addition to object-presence prediction, we introduce an integrated localization module that verifies pairwise spatial relations required by the prompt. This module shares the same backbone as the HP network and differs only in the final predic-tion head. It operates at the same critical timestep 

T using the identical multi-modal inputs, namely PFI T , cross-attention maps, and textual tokens. 

Prompt relation extraction. Let O be the set of objects extracted as in Eq. 5. If the prompt specifies positional constraints between two objects, we define the set of relations using a com-pact extractor. Let Π = {top , bottom , left , right }.We compute 

R = REL( y, O ) ⊆ O × O × Π, (8) where REL( ·) is a lightweight LLM-based relation extractor, applied in parallel with the early diffu-sion steps, similarly to object extraction described in Sec. 5.2. 

Centroid estimation. For each object o ∈ O,the Localization Prediction (LP) network predicts the centroid co = ( xo, y o) of its final placement in image coordinates using inputs at T . The centroid is obtained by a regression head over the shared features computed from PFI T , the cross-attention map Ao, T , and the text token vo:

co = LP( Ao, T , PFI T , v o), (9) where LP( ·) shares the backbone of HP and replaces the final classification layer with a 2D regression layer for ( xo, y o). 

Relation checking. Given two objects i and 

j, their predicted centroids ci = (xi, y i) and 

cj = (xj , y j ) are compared to verify whether each relation in Π holds (e.g., above/below or left/right) using straightforward coordinate com-parisons with a small tolerance (5% of image size). For a relation r = ( i, j, ρ ) ∈ R , the localization module produces a binary decision 

Li,j,ρ = 1[ ρ(i, j ) holds under ci, c j ], (10) which evaluates whether the positional constraint is satisfied at T .

Joint gating with HP. The overall decision to continue generation at timestep T is the conjunc-tion of module decisions. Let Ho be the per-object presence predictions from Eq. 7. If no spatial rela-tions are specified ( R = ∅), we recover the original criterion ∀o ∈ O, H o = 1. Otherwise, we require 

G =



∀o ∈ O, H o = 1 



∧



∀(i, j, ρ ) ∈ R , L i,j,ρ = 1 



.

(11) Generation proceeds if and only if G = 1; other-wise, the current run is aborted and restarted with a new seed, consistent with the HEaD+ policy. This module is model-agnostic and can be enabled alongside other modules within the same gating scheme. 

# 5 InsideGen Dataset 

# 5.1 Prompts Selection 

To train the HP network, we require a dataset containing intermediate outputs from the diffusion process. Since our goal is to train HEaD+ on real-istic scenarios, we curated 4,100 prompts from the dataset introduced by Bakr et al. (2023), ensuring coverage of diverse objects and situations. These prompts are built specifically to stress different generation capabilities, namely spatial composi-tion, size composition, action composition, fair-ness, and bias. To augment the dimensionality of the dataset and thoroughly investigate out-put variations influenced by different seeds, we generated 11 images for each prompt using dis-tinct seeds. In total, we generated nearly 45,000 8Fig. 3 : Qualitative examples of the Predicted Final Image at different critical timesteps on simple prompts. Already from the 16 th step the final image is fully represented and the presence of objects can be predicted. images, both with Stable Diffusion v1.4 and Sta-ble Diffusion v2.0 generators (Rombach et al., 2022). During generation, we fixed 50 steps of the diffusion process and we collected the PFI and cross-attention maps A at multiple time steps for every requested objects to give the possibility to make different tests for different critical timesteps 

T 2. Dataset was divided in train, val and test (80-10-10), splitting over the prompts, keeping all seeds in the same set. 

# 5.2 Target Objects Extraction 

During the dataset creation process and during real-time inference, objects, denoted as O, are extracted from the textual prompt  y, as described in Eq. 5. For this purpose, we employed GPT-3.5 (Achiam et al., 2023), selected for its robust zero-shot generalization abilities. This method stands in contrast to conventional text tag-ging techniques that generally necessitate specific training for each domain. The extraction procedure is time-efficient and can be executed concurrently with the initial dif-fusion steps. This parallel processing is made possible by selecting a non-initial critical timestep 

T , which enables the object extraction to proceed in tandem with the diffusion process. We instructed the system to use a specific prompt to guide its entity recognition process. The prompt used was as follows:                                

> 2In particular, the critical steps Tare chosen as follows: [0, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 12, 14, 16, 18, 20, 25, 40]
> You are asystem that is able to recognize entities in atext. Entities are objects, people, animals, etc. that have aphysical representation. Avoid to include abstract subjects. Do not consider adjectives in the entities.

To enhance the model accuracy, we also pro-vided a few-shot learning approach with relevant examples. This method was crucial in ensuring that the model was focused on extracting only concrete entities while excluding abstract concepts and adjectives, aligning with the objectives of our research and the operational requirements of the HEaD+ pipeline. 

# 5.3 Automatic Label Creation 

A key aspect of our dataset collection approach is an automatic labeling pipeline to verify the pres-ence of specific objects in the generated images. A strong requirement for this labeling system is the ability to operate without a predefined set of object labels, necessitating the use of an open vocabulary approach. This approach pro-vides flexibility and adaptability in identifying a wide range of objects, regardless of their charac-teristics. According to this objective, we adopted OWLv2 (Minderer, Gritsenko, & Houlsby, 2024), a open vocabulary detector renowned for its robust detection capabilities and for providing confidence scores for each identified object. Fur-thermore, we leverage OWLv2 to extract object centroids, which are crucial for training the LP 9network. The ability of this model to accurately detect and quantify the presence of various objects significantly improved the reliability and integrity of our dataset. The likelihood of achieving a com-plete generation, meaning all requested objects are present in the final image, for each object count and model type is depicted in Fig. 1(a). 

# 5.4 InsideGen qualitatives 

We present different qualitative samples of the InsideGen dataset in Figure 4. In these exam-ples, we performed the object extraction pipeline following the procedure detailed in Section 5.2, and generated the images using Stable Diffusion 1.4 (Rombach et al., 2022). Notably, first insights on subject hallucinations are still detectable at timestep 16 of the generation process. For instance, considering the prompt A dog over a airplane and above a car , the second row does not represent either the dog or the 

car in its PFI. Moreover, the cross-attention maps of these missing subjects are less empha-sized compared to the upper row, where all the objects are well represented. Similar out-comes are observed in the prompt A dog is happily sitting on a bench, licking its lips after devouring a slice of delicious pizza . Indeed, pizza is missing from both the final image and the PFI in the example in the fourth row. Compared to the third instance, where all the subjects are well-represented in the PFI, the cross-attention map is more activated in the case of pizza subject. 

# 6 Experiments 

Training and implementation details. The training for the Hallucination Prediction network is conducted using a learning rate of 5 × 10 −4,with a reduction on plateau strategy. Specifically, the learning rate is reduced by a factor of 0.5 if there is no improvement observed for 10 epochs, demonstrating a patient approach to convergence. HP is trained on SD2 with a fixed batch size of 128. From a technical perspective, the Trans-former Decoder is equipped with 12 self-attention and cross-attention blocks, each of which has 3 attention heads. The convolutional layers that process the cross-attention maps instead have a 3 × 3 kernel with stride 1 and padding 1 with 

Table 1 : TN-Rate, Recall, and percentage of time saved for the HEaD+ model at different timesteps. In addition to the model name, the timestep T used for training the model is speci-fied. HEaD refers to our previous method (Betti et al., 2024)                                     

> Model TN-Rate Recall Time Saved
> HEaD+ 5 50.16 90.22 37.73
> HEaD+ 8 56.93 91.06 36.37 HEaD+ 10 58.37 90.09 30.03 HEaD+ 12 63.36 91.15 30.11 HEaD+ 14 61.65 93.42 32.91 HEaD+ 16 64.42 93.60 30.03 HEaD+ 18 66.86 93.13 25.64 HEaD+ 20 65.43 94.81 26.85 HEaD+ 25 76.95 93.40 14.18 HEaD 8 43.73 85.67 11.55 HEaD 25 52.16 88.02 -11.70

an output channel of 32, 64, and 128 for respec-tively the first, second, and third layers. Follow-ing each convolutional layer, batch normalization, ReLU activation, and MaxPooling operations are sequentially applied. An exception resides in the terminal convolutional layer, which incorporates adaptive average pooling to refine the dimension-ality to a 14 × 14 feature map. This resultant map is then flattened and projected to the 192 embedding dimension of the Transformer decoder. 

# 6.1 Time Saving Experiment 

This experiment is designed to evaluate a specific aspect of the performance of our method, namely its ability to achieve a complete generation. Tradi-tional models typically require a full run followed by a post-generation evaluation, restarting the process if the output is not complete . The unique advantage of employing HEaD+ lies in its capabil-ity to perform evaluations during the generation process itself, potentially allowing for much earlier restarts when non-ideal outputs are detected. This can significantly reduce the overall time spent on generating and evaluating images. It is important to note that, for the purposes of this experiment, we do not account for the time that would nor-mally be consumed by a model without HEaD+ in conducting post-generation evaluations. 

HP Performance Impact. The HP network predicts whether to continue or halt the image generation process. When a True Positive (TP) 10 Fig. 4 : Examples of Target Objects Extraction, cross-attention maps, and the Predicted Final Image at timestep T = 16. The cross-attention maps are highlighted with a green border when they correspond with the object in the image; otherwise, they are highlighted in red. occurs, the correct generation proceeds uninter-rupted, having no effect on computation time. Conversely, a False Positive (FP) allows an incor-rect generation to continue without interruption, thus missing an opportunity for time savings, but still not impacting computation time. A True Neg-ative (TN) indicates an incorrect generation has been correctly halted, leading to time savings. Finally, a False Negative (FN) means a correct generation is mistakenly stopped, resulting in a loss of time. The HP network is expected to demonstrate proficient recall performance, characterized by minimal FNs, thereby preventing the unwarranted cessation of correct runs. Concurrently, the net-work should achieve high true-negative rate, char-acterized by a minimal number of FPs relative to TNs. This is critical to ensure the timely interrup-tion of incorrect generations, thereby enhancing time-saving. Consequently, in the training phases of the HP network, emphasis was placed on achiev-ing both recall and true-negative rate metrics. 

Best T selection. The most impactful hyper-parameter in HEaD+ is T , the step in which the HP network is applied. An earlier detection, with a small T , can potentially lead to greater time savings in the case of TNs (correct hallucina-tion identification). Nevertheless, this approach is met with a notable challenge: during the prelim-inary phases, the quality of cross-attention maps and PFIs is suboptimal, thereby affecting the performance efficacy of the HP network. To quantify the time saved or lost using the model, we conducted Monte Carlo simulations until a complete generation is found. The detailed algorithm and pseudo-code are provided in the Appendix. We compared the same model trained on different T and results are shown in Table 1. Recall values are maintained using smaller T

values while TN-Rate changes significantly. The overall time saved for a complete generation in an ideal scenario with HEaD+ used with T = 5 is the highest, with a potential 37.73% of time saved over a normal version of SD2. Early detection has 11 the biggest impact considering recall values are similar. We compared the current models with HEaD (Betti et al., 2024) models which exhibit significantly poorer performance on the InsideGen dataset. For instance, when comparing at the same timestep T = 25, HEaD+ increases time-saving by 25.88%. Further, HEaD obtains no benefit (-11.70%) when introduced in this complex scenario. Similarly when comparing the methodologies at lower timestep T = 8, HEaD+ obtains a gain of 26.18% in time-saving. 

# 6.2 Generation Quality Comparison 

To compare the final image quality after a full generation, we followed the evaluation protocol introduced in Z. Wang et al. (2024). Specifically, in this benchmark, the text-to-image model is prompted to generate five subjects ( i.e. A, B, C, D, E ) with the caption A photo of A, B, C, D, and E . Subsequently, an open-vocabulary object detector (Minderer et al., 2024) is asked to detect the presence of the subjects in the generated images. In Table 2 the performance of different models, in their base form or with HEaD+, are presented. This split includes 80 objects extracted from COCO (T.-Y. Lin et al., 2014) combined as previously defined, building 1000 different prompts. Considering the capability of each model to potentially introduce hallucina-tions, the generated images may feature between one to five subjects. The metric MG-N is utilized to quantitatively ascertain the count of generated images that accurately portray a minimum of N

subjects as requested in the initial prompt. Results are reported with mean and standard deviation over 10 seeds following the original implementa-tion. To promote a fair comparison, we impose a limitation on the maximum number of restarts for HEaD+, specifically setting this limit to five iter-ations. This constraint is designed to standardize the inference time, facilitating a direct compari-son with alternative methodologies. In instances where a complete image fails to materialize within these iterations, the seed with the highest number of objects predicted by HEaD+ is chosen for the generation. Further, the HEaD+ model is trained on SD2 on InsideGen, which differs significantly from the datasets used in these experiments. Addi-tionally, the critical timestep T is set to 25. The number of inference steps is set to 50 for SD mod-els and 20 for PixArt, maintaining the default settings; similarly, the critical timestep T is set to 25 and 10 for SD models and PixArt, respec-tively. The defined HEaD+ methodology proves beneficial in enhancing the overall quality of the output. As illustrated in Table 2, the adoption of HEaD+ enhances the detection of object pres-ence in comparison to SD 1.4 (Rombach et al., 2022). Specifically, an average increase of 14.29% in the detection of three objects is observed when HEaD+ is integrated with SD1.4 compared to the raw SD. Additionally, improvements of 7.85% and 0.9% are noted for MG4 and MG5, respectively. When compared to Composable Diffusion (Liu et al., 2022b), Layout Guidance (M. Chen et al., 2024), and Structured Diffusion (Feng et al., 2023), HEaD+ with SD1.4 surpasses them in nearly all the MG categories. Specifically, for MG3 metric, SD1.4 equipped with HEaD+ obtains a gain of 43.16%, 4.8%, and 16.39% over Compos-able, Layout Guidance, and Structured Diffusion respectively. Significantly, HEaD+ was initially trained using the model SD2, which demonstrates the capability of the model to adapt to various dif-fusion models beyond the one it was originally trained on. This adaptability is further corrob-orated by performance gains when HEaD+ is used with TokenCompose (Z. Wang et al., 2024): HEaD+ yields improvements of 5.11%, 6.52%, and 1.65% on MG3–MG5 over TokenCompose. More-over, with Transformer-based PixArt-α (J. Chen et al., 2024), HEaD+ achieves the best MG scores across MG2–MG5 (Table 2). Overall, these results confirm that HEaD+ is model-agnostic, effectively complementing both UNet- and Transformer-based diffusion generators without retraining the target model. 

# 6.3 Ablation on Input Types 

To understand the individual impact of cross-attention maps, PFI, and the textual feature vector on the final assessment, we conducted an ablation study. This involved creating variations of the HP network, each excluding one of the inputs, and comparing their performance. The analysis 12 Table 2 : Comparison with state-of-the-art methodologies, on the evaluation protocol of Z. Wang et al. (2024). Results without HEaD+ are taken from Z. Wang et al. (2024). 

COCO Method MG2 MG3 MG4 MG5 SD 1.4 (Rombach et al., 2022) 90.72 1.33 50.74 0.89 11.68 0.45 0.88 0.21 

SD 1.4 w/ HEaD+ 95.44 0.67 65.03 1.76 19.53 1.73 1.78 0.24 

Composable Diffusion (Liu et al., 2022b) 63.33 0.59 21.87 1.01 3.25 0.45 0.23 0.18 

Layout Guidance (M. Chen et al., 2024) 93.22 0.69 60.15 1.58 19.49 0.88 2.27 0.44 

Structured Diffusion (Feng et al., 2023) 90.40 1.06 48.64 1.32 10.71 0.92 0.68 0.25 

Attend-and-Excite (Chefer et al., 2023) 93.64 0.76 65.10 1.24 28.01 0.90 6.01 0.61 

Token Compose (Z. Wang et al., 2024) 98.08 0.40 76.16 1.04 28.81 0.95 3.28 0.48 

Token Compose w/ HEaD+ 97.61 0.40 81.27 1.40 35.33 1.97 4.93 0.57 

PixArt-α (J. Chen et al., 2024) 98.59 0.49 83.19 2.18 42.80 4.09 8.80 2.10 

PixArt-α w/ HEaD+ 99.25 0.28 89.19 0.77 51.65 1.89 12.72 1.46 

Table 3 : Ablation of different input types: TN-Rate and Recall for different model settings. Experiments done at T = 25. In the Table XA and Text represent cross-attention maps and vo, respectively. HEaD+ is the model with all input types that we have used throughout our experiments. 

Name TN-Rate Recall 

Text + XA 62.35 93.82 Text + PFI 74.84 91.21 PFI + XA 33.72 95.22 

HEaD+ 76.95 93.40 

reveals that the most accurate results are achieved when all inputs are incorporated. Specifically, when the textual token vo is dropped, the perfor-mance decreases by 24% in TN-Rate. The strong interaction between CLIP features extracted from the PFI and vo is relevant for HEaD+, as it precisely specifies the target elements that the model needs to identify within the visual inputs. Indeed, when only textual information and cross-attention maps are combined performance still takes a decrease of 12.41% on TN-Rate, proving the coupling between the textual input and PFI. Although the cross-attention map has the least impact compared to the other inputs, it increases Recall by 1.19% and TN-Rate by 2.11% compared to the model without it. This is attributable to the ability of the cross-attention map to guide the focus of the model toward certain regions within the image, facilitating the verification of object presence. 

# 6.4 Qualitative Comparison 

In Figure 5, we provide some qualitative com-parisons of generated images by SD2 and Token-Compose with and without HEaD+, evaluated on prompts from InsideGen test set. The four rows represent different contributes of HEaD+. In the top row, both SD2 and TokenCompose fail to rep-resent correctly the subject moon . Triggered by this hallucination, HEaD+ reiterates with another seed until a complete generation is reached. Con-versely, in the second row, SD2 accurately renders both car and aircraft , inducing HEaD+ to allow the generative process to continue, thereby yielding an identical result. In contrast, Token-Compose exhibits a failure by negating the pres-ence of the car during its generative process, a deviation promptly addressed by HEaD+ through the termination of generation and the introduc-tion of a new seed. Similarly, in the third row, SD2 hallucinates person and TokenCompose chair 

while HEaD+ corrects them. The concluding row presents a scenario very complex with five objects in the prompt; SD2 solely visualizes slopes , and HEaD+, despite its efforts, fails to generate all intended objects, reaching the maximum number of iterations. Nonetheless, in its interaction with TokenCompose, HEaD+ successfully intervenes by incorporating the omitted skier , showcasing its ability to correct hallucinations effectively. 13 Fig. 5 : Qualitative analysis on the comparison between a normal Diffusion Model and the same version using HEaD+. The same starting seed was used for all the experiments on the same prompt. 

# 6.5 Localization Module Results 

Training. We train the Localization Prediction (LP) network with the same optimization setup described in Section 6, using object centroids from InsideGen for non-hallucinated objects. 

Evaluation protocol. To validate the LP net-work, we sample two objects from COCO and compose a two-object prompt with a single posi-tional relation ρ ∈ Π = {top , bottom , left , right }.For each prompt, we generate 5 images with differ-ent seeds and collect inputs at the critical timestep 

T , exactly as for HP. Following the procedure in Section 6, we evaluate three model configu-rations: the base generator, the base generator with HEaD+, and the base generator augmented with both HEaD+ and the LP network. We ver-ify the positional relation on generated images by applying OWLv2 to detect object centroids and checking whether ρ holds within tolerance of a 5% of the image size. Subsequently, we report the fol-lowing metrics: (i) MG2: the percentage of images in which both objects are present; (ii) MG loc :the percentage of images in which both objects are present and the specified positional relation is satisfied; and (iii) Relation Consistency: the pro-portion of correct relations among all images in which both objects are present. 

Discussion. Table 4 presents the evaluation of the localization module. Consistent with prior findings, incorporating HEaD+ yields systematic improvements in MG2 over the base models. Fur-thermore, enabling the localization module brings additional gains in both MG loc and Relation Con-sistency, as generations predicted to violate the specified positional relation are terminated early and resampled. For example, Relation Consistency increases by 22.0%, 13.9%, and 17.5% relative to SD 1.4, SD 2, and TokenCompose with HEaD+ but without the localization module, respectively. Relative to the base models, the most substan-tial improvement is observed with TokenCompose: equipping it with HEaD+ and the localization module raises Relation Consistency from 48.5% to 67.5%, indicating that relation-consistent genera-tions are encouraged more effectively than with either the base model alone or the base model plus HEaD+. 

# 7 Limitations 

In this paper we introduced HEaD+, a model designed to prevent the generation of hallucinated images with missing subjects. Nevertheless, it is critical to acknowledge that the model’s capa-bility to predict hallucinations is not flawless. In certain instances, it may fail to accurately capture all subjects within an image or may pre-maturely halt the generation process of an image that could have been depicted correctly if allowed to complete. Moreover, while the primary focus of HEaD+ is on the absence of subjects, other 14 Table 4 : Impact of the localization module. MG2: both objects present. MG loc : both objects present and the required relation satisfied. Relation Consistency (%) is the percentage of correct relations among images where both objects are present.                               

> Method MG2 MG loc Relation Consistency (%) SD 1.4 39.6 19.2 48.5 SD 1.4 w/ HEaD+ wo/ localization 60.2 20.0 33.2 SD 1.4 w/ HEaD+ w/ localization 61.2 33.8 55.2
> SD 2 51.6 22.2 43.0 SD 2 w/ HEaD+ wo/ localization 69.2 29.0 41.9 SD 2 w/ HEaD+ w/ localization 68.8 38.4 55.8
> Token Compose 67.6 32.8 48.5 Token Compose w/ HEaD+ wo/ localization 71.3 35.7 50.0 Token Compose w/ HEaD+ w/ localization 70.8 47.8 67.5

types of inconsistencies may also manifest dur-ing image generation. For example, text-to-image models might inaccurately portray spatial rela-tionships between objects (M. Chen et al., 2024) or fail in the linguistic binding of entities and modifiers (Rassin et al., 2024). 

# 8 Conclusions 

This paper presents HEaD+, a state-of-the-art methodology designed to significantly improve the efficiency and accuracy of image generation pro-cesses using diffusion models. The key to our inno-vation lies in the integrated use of cross-attention maps, Predicted Final Image, and textual data to predict the outcome of the image generation process. HEaD+ has been shown to improve the generation fidelity of the requested objects inside the final image. A crucial takeaway from our research is that HEaD+, in its current form with-out retraining, can be seamlessly integrated with various diffusion models, reliably ensuring that all specified objects are accurately represented in the final image. The internal operations of the diffu-sion model are not affected by the functionality of HEaD+. Furthermore, we created InsideGen, which is a dataset that consists of intermediate diffusion output (attention maps, and PFIs) with annotated hallucinations. This resource will facil-itate further investigation into how the internal generation data can be leveraged to refine the image generation process as a whole. 

# References 

Achiam, J., Adler, S., Agarwal, S., Ahmad, L., Akkaya, I., Aleman, F.L., . . . others (2023). GPT-4 Technical Report. arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.08774. 

Agarwal, A., Karanam, S., Joseph, K., Saxena, A., Goswami, K., Srinivasan, B.V. (2023). A-STAR: Test-time Attention Segregation and Retention for Text-to-image Synthesis. 

Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer Vision. 

Bakr, E.M., Sun, P., Shen, X., Khan, F.F., Li, L.E., Elhoseiny, M. (2023). HRS-Bench: Holistic, Reliable and Scalable Benchmark for Text-to-Image Models. Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer Vision. 

Balaji, Y., Nah, S., Huang, X., Vahdat, A., Song, J., Zhang, Q., . . . Liu, M.-Y. (2022). eDiff-I: Text-to-Image Diffusion Models with an Ensemble of Expert Denoisers. arXiv preprint arXiv:2211.01324. 

Betti, F., Baraldi, L., Baraldi, L., Cucchiara, R., Sebe, N. (2024). Optimizing Resource Consumption in Diffusion Models through Hallucination Early Detection. Proceedings of the European Conference on Computer Vision Workshops. 

Betti, F., Staiano, J., Baraldi, L., Baraldi, L., Cuc-chiara, R., Sebe, N. (2023). Let’s ViCE! 15 Mimicking Human Cognitive Behavior in Image Generation Evaluation. Proceedings of the ACM International Conference on Multimedia. 

Chefer, H., Alaluf, Y., Vinker, Y., Wolf, L., Cohen-Or, D. (2023). Attend-and-Excite: Attention-Based Semantic Guidance for Text-to-Image Diffusion Models. ACM Transactions on Graphics (TOG). 

Chen, J., YU, J., GE, C., Yao, L., Xie, E., Wang, Z., . . . Li, Z. (2024). Pixart-$\alpha $:Fast training of diffusion transformer for photorealistic text-to-image synthesis. 

The twelfth international conference on learning representations. Retrieved from https://openreview.net/forum?id=eAKmQPe3m1 Chen, M., Laina, I., Vedaldi, A. (2024). Training-Free Layout Control with Cross-Attention Guidance. Proceedings of the IEEE Win-ter Conference on Applications of Computer Vision. 

Dhariwal, P., & Nichol, A. (2021). Diffusion Models Beat GANs on Image Synthesis. 

Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems. 

Feng, W., He, X., Fu, T.-J., Jampani, V., Akula, A.R., Narayana, P., . . . Wang, W.Y. (2023). Training-Free Structured Diffusion Guid-ance for Compositional Text-to-Image Syn-thesis. Proceedings of the International Conference on Learning Representations. 

Hertz, A., Mokady, R., Tenenbaum, J.M., Aber-man, K., Pritch, Y., Cohen-Or, D. (2022). Prompt-to-Prompt Image Editing with Cross Attention Control. arXiv preprint arXiv:2208.01626. 

Hessel, J., Holtzman, A., Forbes, M., Bras, R.L., Choi, Y. (2021). CLIPScore: AReference-free Evaluation Metric for Image Captioning. Proceedings of the Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing. 

Ho, J., Jain, A., Abbeel, P. (2020). Denoising Diffusion Probabilistic Models. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems. 

Hu, Y., Liu, B., Kasai, J., Wang, Y., Osten-dorf, M., Krishna, R., Smith, N.A. (2023). TIFA: Accurate and Interpretable Text-to-Image Faithfulness Evaluation with Ques-tion Answering. Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer Vision. 

Karthik, S., Roth, K., Mancini, M., Akata, Z. (2023). If at First You Don’t Succeed, Try, Try Again: Faithful Diffusion-based Text-to-Image Generation by Selection. arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.13308. 

Kingma, D.P., & Welling, M. (2014). Auto-Encoding Variational Bayes. Proceedings of the International Conference on Learning Representations. 

Ku, M., Jiang, D., Wei, C., Yue, X., Chen, W. (2023). Viescore: Towards explainable met-rics for conditional image synthesis evalua-tion. arXiv preprint arXiv:2312.14867. 

Li, Y., Keuper, M., Zhang, D., Khoreva, A. (2023). Divide & Bind Your Attention for Improved Generative Semantic Nursing. Proceedings of the British Machine Vision Conference. 

Lin, T.-Y., Maire, M., Belongie, S., Hays, J., Perona, P., Ramanan, D., . . . Zitnick, C.L. (2014). Microsoft COCO: Common Objects in Context. Proceedings of the European Conference on Computer Vision. 

Lin, Z., Pathak, D., Li, B., Li, J., Xia, X., Neubig, G., . . . Ramanan, D. (2024). Evaluating text-to-visual generation with image-to-text generation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2404.01291. 

Liu, N., Li, S., Du, Y., Torralba, A., Tenenbaum, J.B. (2022a). Compositional Visual Gen-eration with Composable Diffusion Models. 

Proceedings of the European Conference on Computer Vision. 

Liu, N., Li, S., Du, Y., Torralba, A., Tenenbaum, 16 J.B. (2022b). Compositional Visual Gen-eration with Composable Diffusion Models. 

Proceedings of the European Conference on Computer Vision. 

Lu, Y., Yang, X., Li, X., Wang, X.E., Wang, W.Y. (2024). LLMScore: Unveiling the Power of Large Language Models in Text-to-Image Synthesis Evaluation. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems. 

Mao, J., Wang, X., Aizawa, K. (2023). Guided Image Synthesis via Initial Image Editing in Diffusion Model. Proceedings of the ACM International Conference on Multimedia. 

Minderer, M., Gritsenko, A., Houlsby, N. (2024). Scaling Open-Vocabulary Object Detection. 

Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems. 

Peebles, W., & Xie, S. (2023). Scalable Diffusion Models with Transformers. Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer Vision. 

Radford, A., Kim, J.W., Hallacy, C., Ramesh, A., Goh, G., Agarwal, S., . . . Sutskever, I. (2021). Learning Transferable Visual Models From Natural Language Supervision. Pro-ceedings of the International Conference on Machine Learning. 

Rassin, R., Hirsch, E., Glickman, D., Ravfogel, S., Goldberg, Y., Chechik, G. (2024). Linguis-tic Binding in Diffusion Models: Enhancing Attribute Correspondence through Atten-tion Map Alignment. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems. 

Rombach, R., Blattmann, A., Lorenz, D., Esser, P., Ommer, B. (2022). High-Resolution Image Synthesis with Latent Diffusion Mod-els. Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Con-ference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition. 

Ronneberger, O., Fischer, P., Brox, T. (2015). U-Net: Convolutional Networks for Biomedical Image Segmentation. Medical Image Com-puting and Computer-assisted Intervention. 

Samuel, D., Ben-Ari, R., Darshan, N., Maron, H., Chechik, G. (2024). Norm-guided latent space exploration for text-to-image generation. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems. 

Samuel, D., Ben-Ari, R., Raviv, S., Darshan, N., Chechik, G. (2023). Generating images of rare concepts using pre-trained diffusion models. Proceedings of the AAAI Confer-ence on Artificial Intelligence. 

Singh, J., & Zheng, L. (2023). Divide, Evaluate, and Refine: Evaluating and Improving Text-to-Image Alignment with Iterative VQA Feedback. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems. 

Sohl-Dickstein, J., Weiss, E., Maheswaranathan, N., Ganguli, S. (2015). Deep Unsupervised Learning using Nonequilibrium Thermody-namics. Proceedings of the International Conference on Machine Learning. 

Vaswani, A., Shazeer, N., Parmar, N., Uszkoreit, J., Jones, L., Gomez, A.N., . . . Polosukhin, I. (2017). Attention Is All You Need. 

Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems. 

Wang, W., Bao, J., Zhou, W., Chen, D., Chen, D., Yuan, L., Li, H. (2022). Semantic Image Synthesis via Diffusion Models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2207.00050. 

Wang, Z., Sha, Z., Ding, Z., Wang, Y., Tu, Z. (2024). TokenCompose: Grounding Diffu-sion with Token-level Supervision. Pro-ceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition. 

Wu, Q., Liu, Y., Zhao, H., Bui, T., Lin, Z., Zhang, Y., Chang, S. (2023). Har-nessing the Spatial-Temporal Attention of Diffusion Models for High-Fidelity Text-to-Image Synthesis. Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer Vision. 

Zhang, Y., Kang, B., Hooi, B., Yan, S., Feng, J. (2023). Deep Long-Tailed Learning: A Sur-vey. IEEE Transactions on Pattern Analysis 

17 and Machine Intelligence. IEEE. Appendix A Monte Carlo HEaD+ simulation 

The Python pseudocode detailed in Algorithm 1 simulates the time savings achieved by imple-menting the HEaD+ approach within the image generation process. Its effectiveness depends on the performance of the model, particularly in terms of recall, true-negative rate, and the num-ber of subjects present |O|. HEaD+ analyzes each subject independently, and it only requires one of the objects to be predicted as absent to halt the generation and restart with a new seed. The time saving occurs when the model incorrectly gener-ates an image, i.e. a subject is not present, and HEaD+ is able to predict this and immediately restart the generation with a different seed. The time saved in each of these instances is dependent on T , which represents the timestep in which the prediction is done. 18 1 # complete_generation_probability: probability of complete image  

> 2

# recall: recall of the HP network  

> 3

# TN_Rate: TN_Rate of the HP network  

> 4

# time_per_model_iteration: time for completing a generation  

> 5

# max_step_used: last step used for HEaD evaluation  

> 6

# num_objects: number of objects to evaluate  

> 7

# total_steps: number of generation step, 50 for SD2  

> 8

# num_simulations: number of Monte Carlo simulations  

> 910

# Computing time when HEaD model detects failure  

> 11

time_used_per_TN = (max_step_used / total_steps) * time_per_model_iteration  

> 12

# Time with HEaD approach  

> 13

time_with_head = 0 

> 14 15

for _ in range(num_simulations):  

> 16

success = False  

> 17

while not success:  

> 18

# Generate an image that will be complete  

> 19

# with a probability of complete_generation_probability  

> 20

actual_success = random() < complete_generation_probability  

> 21

if actual_success:  

> 22

# HP network must predict all 1s to halt the generation  

> 23

model_predicts_success = all(  

> 24

random.random() < recall for _ in range(num_objects)  

> 25

) 

> 26

if model_predicts_success: # TP  

> 27

time_with_head += time_per_model_iteration  

> 28

success = True  

> 29

else: # FN  

> 30

time_with_head += time_per_model_iteration  

> 31

else:  

> 32

# The generation has at least one object hallucinated.  

> 33

# The HP must find at least one hallucinated object to  

> 34

# restart the generative process  

> 35

model_predicts_failure = any(  

> 36

random() < TN_Rate  

> 37

for _ in range(num_objects)  

> 38

) 

> 39

if model_predicts_failure: # TN  

> 40

time_with_head += time_used_per_TN  

> 41

else: # FP  

> 42

time_with_head += time_per_model_iteration  

> 43 44

# Time with HEaD approach  

> 45

avg_time_with_HEaD = time_with_head / num_simulations  

> 46 47

# Time without HEaD approach  

> 48

avg_time_no_HEaD = time_per_model_iteration / complete_generation_probability  

> 49 50

return 1 - avg_time_with_HEaD / avg_time_no_HEaD 

Algorithm 1: Python pseudo code for HEaD+ Monte Carlo simlulation. 19 Appendix B Additional qualitative comparisons 

In addition to the main qualitative analysis in Fig. 5, we provide a larger panel of comparisons between base generators and their counterparts equipped with HEaD+. As illustrated in Fig. B1, HEaD+ systematically recovers missing subjects and improves compositional correctness across SD 1.4, TokenCompose (Z. Wang et al., 2024), and PixArt-α (J. Chen et al., 2024). These exam-ples complement the quantitative gains discussed in Section 6 and in Table 2. 20 Fig. B1 : Extended qualitative comparison across SD 1.4, TokenCompose, and PixArt-α with and without HEaD+ on multi-object prompts. HEaD+ helps recover missing subjects and yields images that better satisfy the requested compositions. 21