Title: Generative Adversarial Reconstruction with Adaptive Thresholding for Obstructed Targets in Computational Microwave Imaging

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2608.01177v1

Published Time: Tue, 04 Aug 2026 01:36:08 GMT

Number of Pages: 19

Markdown Content:
> IEEE SENSORS JOURNAL, VOL. XX, NO. XX, XXXX 2024 1

# Generative Adversarial Reconstruction with Adaptive Thresholding for Obstructed Targets in Computational Microwave Imaging 

Jiaming Zhang, Graduate Student Member, IEEE, Mar´ ıa Garc´ ıa-Fern ´ andez, Senior Member, IEEE, 

Guillermo ´ Alvarez-Narciandi, Senior Member, IEEE, Jie Zhang, Senior Member, IEEE, Muhammad Ali Babar Abbasi, Senior Member, IEEE, and Okan Yurduseven, Senior Member, IEEE 

Abstract — In this work, an end-to-end generative adversarial framework for computational microwave imaging (CMI) is proposed to reconstruct the targets of interest directly from the measurements of targets obstructed by undesired objects. It integrates a conditional generative adversarial network (cGAN) with a learnable soft-threshold module (STM) to adaptively suppress non-target related information. The proposed framework is evaluated on a diverse dataset comprising MNIST digits obstructed by E-MNIST letters for training and testing, as well as on measurements acquired with an experimental CMI system. In addition, further studies involving objects with different geometries are conducted, demonstrating that the proposed approach can be adapted to other types of objects. Numerical experiments show that the proposed cGAN-STM achieves a normalized mean square error (NMSE) of 0.066 and a structural similarity index (SSIM) of 0.876 under ideal conditions. Comprehensive analyses, including benchmarking, analysis of the STM mechanism, and evaluation under different obstruction sizes, are also conducted. The performance of the model under different signal-to-noise ratio (SNR) scenarios is also evaluated, achieving reasonable reconstruction quality at 15 dB SNR with an NMSE of 0.168 and an SSIM of 0.700. Even at low SNR levels, recognizable target outlines are preserved. These results highlight the effectiveness and adaptability of the proposed method. 

Index Terms — Enter key words or phrases in alphabetical order, separated by comma. Examples: artificial neural network (ANN), circuit parameter extraction, multistatic localization, nonradiative dielectric (NRD) waveguide, numerical calibration waveguide filter, optimal sensor placement, traveling wave antenna. 

I. I NTRODUCTION 

A. Background 

Microwave imaging has gained significant attention across a wide range of applications, including localization, de-bris detection, and earth science, to name a few [1]–[5]. Conventional microwave imaging techniques mainly rely on synthetic aperture radar (SAR)-based modalities [6]–[8]. In SAR-based approaches, the transmitters (Tx) and receivers (Rx) are either mechanically or electronically scanned at the Nyquist sampling interval, leading to a point-by-point interrogation (raster scan) of the imaging scene [9], [10]. 

This work was supported by the Leverhulme Trust under Research Leadership Award RL-2019-019, and by the UKRI Horizon Europe Guarantee for Marie Skłodowska-Curie Action Postdoctoral Fellowships under Projects EP/X022951/1 and EP/X022943/1. ( Corresponding au-thor: Jiaming Zhang. )Jiaming Zhang, Jie Zhang, Muhammad Ali Babar Abbasi and Okan Yurduseven are with the Centre for Wireless Innovation, Queen’s University Belfast, Belfast, United Kingdom, BT3 9DT. (e-mail: jzhang57@qub.ac.uk). Mar´ ıa Garc´ ıa-Fern ´ andez, Guillermo ´Alvarez-Narciandi are with Group of Signal Theory and Communications, De-partment of Electrical, Electronic, Communications and Systems Engi-neering, University of Oviedo, 33203 Gij ´ on, Spain. 

Although mechanically scanned SAR systems can provide high-fidelity reconstructions, they suffer from time-consuming data acquisition due to sequential antenna motion [11]–[13]. On the other hand, electronically scanned array systems [14], [15] overcome this limitation by enabling fast beam steering, but at the cost of intensive hardware complexity and increased power consumption. To tackle these issues, computational microwave imaging (CMI)-based systems [16] are explored as an alternative. Such systems employ a set of spatially incoherent radiation patterns (or measurement modes) to probe the scene under investigation, achieving a physical layer compression [17]– [19]. CMI-based systems can be categorized by how the spatially-incoherent radiation patterns are generated: dynamic reconfiguration of the aperture [20]–[22] or frequency diver-sity [23]–[25]. In particular, dynamically reconfigured CMI-based systems use a tuning mechanism to actively modify the aperture of the antenna. As a result, a diverse set of radiation patterns can be generated, eliminating the need for large bandwidths [26]. On the other hand, frequency-diverse CMI-based systems require a frequency bandwidth of operation to generate frequency-distinct radiation patterns by arXiv:2608.01177v1 [eess.SP] 2 Aug 2026 2 IEEE SENSORS JOURNAL, VOL. XX, NO. XX, XXXX 2024 

utilizing passive structures. While CMI significantly reduces the hardware complexity by decreasing the number of data acquisition channels, the computational burden of the image reconstruction step can hinder its deployment in real-world applications [27]. 

B. Related Work 

Motivated by the need to reduce the computational burden while maintaining reconstruction quality, recent research has increasingly adopted deep learning approaches for microwave imaging [28]–[30]. For instance, a novel U-Net was proposed in [31] to reconstruct images from phaseless microwave data. [32] also proposed a U-Net–integrated reconstruction scheme that improves the accuracy of dielectric constant estimation for uniaxial objects in microwave imaging. Similarly, in [33], an integrated deep learning system was designed to predict multi-frequency electromagnetic (EM) scattered fields from single-frequency EM scattered fields and to generate the cor-responding image reconstructions. Additionally, a two-stage training method was developed in [34], significantly reducing the difficulty of training deep neural networks for image reconstruction. A physics-guided reconstruction approach was proposed in [35] to recover fine-scale permittivity distributions from limited and noisy scattered-field measurements. Standard feed-forward neural networks proposed in the above literature aim to minimize the loss function that eval-uates the quality of results. However, this minimization often leads to solutions that average all plausible element values, resulting in poor perceptual quality [36], [37]. To address this issue, generative adversarial networks (GANs) are employed to produce outputs with high perceptual quality [38], [39]. In particular, conditional GANs (cGANs) are widely applied to solve image reconstruction problems. For example, in [40], an attention-assisted cGAN was designed for the image reconstruction problem with mixed boundary conditions. This approach eliminated the need for prior knowledge of the boundary conditions when reconstructing the image of the scene. Additionally, [41] applied a deep convolutional cGAN, termed DCCGAN, to transform the single-transmitter-single-frequency measured signals into the reconstructions of the scene. In [42], a novel cGAN was developed with self-attention modules and trained with a novel weighted loss function. This network was capable of solving highly nonlinear inverse scattering problems. [43] developed a deep unfolding GAN within the contrast source inversion framework to im-prove image reconstruction quality under challenging imaging conditions. To address different CMI tasks simultaneously, our previous work proposed a deep learning model named ClassiGAN to concurrently solve the image reconstruction and target classification tasks by only using the back-scattered measured signals as input [44]. Also, in [45], a diffusion model was pro-posed to achieve image reconstructions based on the scattering signal. However, compared to cGAN-based methods, diffusion models require a large number of iterative denoising steps [46], which substantially reduces their computational efficiency. 

C. Motivation and Contribution 

A common feature of the previous studies highlighted earlier is that they consider EM imaging scenarios where the imaged objects are present without any obstructions. This can pose a significant limitation for practical applications as, in reality, an imaged target can be obstructed by secondary objects that can significantly impact the back-scattered information captured from the scene of interest for imaging. In addition to signif-icantly impacting the accuracy of the reconstructed images, such obstructions can also necessitate manual intervention to physically separate the target information from the obstructing objects, which can be time consuming, inefficient, and even impractical due to high false-alarm rates [47], [48]. To tackle the aforementioned issues, in this work, a novel cGAN integrated with deep learning-based soft-threshold mod-ules (STMs) is designed. The proposed technique, termed cGAN-STM, significantly reduces the error caused by the obstruction and learns the relevant features of targets from the CMI-measured signals, achieving high-quality reconstructions of clean targets. To the best of the authors’ knowledge, this work presents a proof-of-concept implementation of a deep generative adversarial learning framework for image reconstruction with obstructed imaging targets in CMI. The main contributions are summarized below:  

> •

Design of the cGAN-STM, which is capable of trans-forming the measured signals directly into the recon-structions of the obstructed imaging targets of interest. Compared to traditional CMI methods, this approach re-duces the computational cost and eliminates the need for manually removing obstructing objects prior to accurate reconstructions.  

> •

Development of a deep learning-based STM to filter out the information associated with the obstructing objects and retrieve that corresponding to the targets of interest. Instead of manually selecting the threshold values, which can slow down the process, the optimal values are learned by this module.  

> •

Benchmark against existing state-of-the-art deep learn-ing methods showing that cGAN-STM achieves superior quantitative and qualitative performance in reconstructing obstructed targets.  

> •

The proposed framework was extensively tested through synthetic data and using measurements obtained with an experimental CMI system. The use of controlled synthetic conditions enabled the assessment of the impact of varying obstruction sizes, STM ablation, different noise conditions, adaptability to unseen targets and STM mechanism analysis. The results demonstrate that the proposed framework effectively reconstructs obstructed targets and exhibits robustness and adaptability across different setups, supporting its potential scalability toward more complex CMI scenarios. The remainder of this article is organized as follows. Section II introduces the CMI paradigm and the image reconstruction algorithms. Section III introduces and explains the function-ality of cGAN-STM. The results are shown and discussed in Section IV. Finally, the main conclusions are drawn in Section AUTHOR et al. : PREPARATION OF PAPERS FOR IEEE TRANSACTIONS AND JOURNALS (MAY 2024) 3Rx 

# Tx 

# Scene  Target 

# x

# y

# z

# Obstruction  

> Fig. 1. Bi-static CMI setup considered for the data generation and for experimental verification. The target example includes an obstruction outlined in purple and a target outlined in red. Both materials are aluminate.

V. 

II. C OMPUTATIONAL MICROWAVE IMAGING 

A CMI-based system probes the imaged scene by using quasi-random spatially incoherent radiation patterns. The term “quasi-random” highlights that the patterns are not purely stochastic but arise from the specific structure or tuning of the metasurface [18], [49], [50]. Meanwhile, “spatially inco-herent” indicates that different modes are nearly orthogonal, facilitating that, ideally, each illumination probes the scene independently and thus enables efficient information encoding [18]. The scattered field Escat , which contains the reflectivity distribution of the scene, ρ(r) [51], according to the first Born approximation [19], [52], [53], is given as: 

Escat =

Z

> V

ρ(r)Einc dV, (1) where Einc is the incident field from the aperture and r

denotes the coordinates vector of the scene. In this work, the bold font is used to denote the vector-matrix notation. For numerical implementation, the scene is discretized into a finite number of pixels, such that the reflectivity distribution, 

ρ, can be represented in vector form. The transfer function of the CMI system, H, which is also called the sensing matrix, can be derived by the dot product of fields radiated by the transmit and receive apertures forming the CMI system, ET x 

and ERx respectively, both of which are propagated to the imaging scene [54]: 

H = ET x · ERx . (2) The back-scattered measured signal g can be obtained by: 

gM ×1 = HM ×N ρN ×1 + nM ×1, (3) where g is a vector of length M , while ρ is a vector of length 

N , corresponding to the reflectivity of the scene. Here, M

denotes the number of measurement modes, while N denotes the number of pixels of the imaging scene. It should be noted that the sensing matrix is not necessarily square, i.e., M̸ = N .Additionally, n is a noise term, which is a vector of length 

M .In this study, the conventional CMI reconstructions are obtained using a commonly employed approach, the least-squares technique given in (4), which retrieves an estimate of the reflectivity of the scene ( ρLS rec ), and they are compared against the proposed cGAN-STM predicted reconstructions (estimated directly from g without reconstructing ρrec ). 

ρLS rec = arg min 

> ρ

|| g − Hρ|| 22 (4) Here, ||·|| 2 indicates the L2-norm. The CMI-based system synthesized in this study relies on the two-dimensional (2D) frequency-diverse metasurface antenna presented in [55]. It comprises two frequency-diverse antennas (or panels), one acting as a Tx and the other as a Rx arranged side by side, operating in a bi-static operating configuration, as shown in Fig. 1. In this work, frequency-diverse antennas operating in the X-band (8–12 GHz) are employed, with further design details provided in [55]. To obtain high-resolution recon-structions, a hybrid CMI-SAR approach [56] is employed to collect sufficient information on the scene. Specifically, the measurement grid consists of 16 positions, spaced 8 cm apart along both the x-axis and y-axis. The total number of measurement modes, M , is 1024, and the number of pixels in the scene, N , is 784. 

III. P ROPOSED APPROACH 

A. Motivation 

In an imaging scenario with obstructed targets, the back-scattered measurements contain information from both the targets of interest and the obstructing objects. Since the task in this work is to directly reconstruct the targets of interest, the information related to the obstructing objects can be regarded as task-specific noise. To mitigate the degradation of image quality caused by obstructions, an automatically learned STM is proposed. The STM adaptively suppresses non-target features while preserving relevant target information, guiding the network to focus on meaningful signals. As will be shown later, the proposed STM plays a crucial role in ensuring robust performance against obstruction-related artifacts. To predict the missing target information in obscured re-gions, generative adversarial learning is employed, enabling the network to infer obstructed parts from the measurements of occluded targets and to generate high-fidelity reconstructions. The STM and adversarial learning modules act in a comple-mentary manner, ensuring accurate and robust reconstruction in obstructed scenarios. 

B. Soft-thresholding Module (STM) Architecture 

To enhance the network’s ability to separate the target information from the interference caused by obstructions, 4 IEEE SENSORS JOURNAL, VOL. XX, NO. XX, XXXX 2024 

a soft-threshold mechanism is employed. The soft-threshold function is defined as: 

Vo =



Vi − τ, if Vi > τ, 

0, if − τ ≤ Vi ≤ τ, Vi + τ, if Vi < −τ, 

(5) where Vi and Vo respectively correspond to the input and output data, and τ denotes the threshold value. Although (5) shares the same mathematical form as the shrinkage operator commonly used in classical compressed sensing [57], the soft-threshold operation applied in the cGAN feature domain serves as an adaptive filter that suppresses obstruction-induced activations instead of promoting sparsity in the reconstructed image or measurement domain. Equation (5) shows that the soft-threshold mechanism is able to highlight salient features by retaining strong activations as positive or negative values, while suppressing weak, poten-tially redundant activations toward zero. However, determining the appropriate threshold value τ typically relies on expert knowledge or an optimization process, which can be time-consuming [58]. Therefore, inspired by the residual shrinkage building unit in [58], a sub-network called STM is designed to automatically learn the optimal threshold values, eliminating the need for manual threshold selection. Fig. 2(a) illustrates the architecture of the STM. As shown in Fig. 2(a), a global average pooling layer [59] is first applied to process the absolute values of the input feature maps. The global average pooled results are then passed through two fully connected layers. The first fully connected layer is followed by a batch normalization (BatchNorm) layer and a rectified linear unit (ReLU) activation function. The second fully connected layer is followed by a sigmoid activation function [60], which scales the output to the range (0,1). Finally, the outputs of the fully connected layers are element-wise multiplied with the globally averaged features to determine the threshold values 

τ . The STM output is computed by applying these calculated threshold values in conjunction with the soft-threshold func-tion defined in (5). The learnable thresholds τ generated by the sub-network are differentiable and can be updated through back-propagation, enabling the STM to adaptively adjust its filtering strength to different inputs during training. 

C. Network Architecture 

cGAN-STM comprises two main components: a genera-tor and a discriminator. The generator is used to transform the back-scattered measurements into image reconstructions, while the discriminator is applied to distinguish the authen-ticity of the image reconstructions generated by the generator. They are trained in an adversarial manner. The detailed architecture of the generator is shown in Fig. 2(b). It mainly uses a U-Net architecture consisting of an encoder and a decoder. The encoder compresses the complex-valued back-scattered measurements into latent feature rep-resentations that emphasize target-related information. The decoder subsequently reconstructs the targets by refining these representations and recovering spatial details suppressed by obstructions. The main element of the encoder is the convo-lutional block (Conv Block), which includes a convolutional layer, a BatchNorm layer, and a leaky ReLU activation func-tion [61]. Similarly, the decoder’s primary component is the transpose convolutional block (TransConv Block) composed of a transpose convolutional layer [62], a BatchNorm layer, a ReLU activation function and an STM. The STM employed in the decoder aids in retaining essential features while re-ducing redundant data, thereby minimizing the influence of obstruction-induced interference during the processing of com-pressed information. To mitigate information loss throughout the encoding and decoding stages, skip connections are end-to-end connected between the corresponding Conv Blocks and TransConv Blocks [63], [64]. As discussed before, the number of measurement modes in the back-scattered data is 

M = 1024 , which exceeds the number of pixels in the target image reconstructions, N = 784 . After being processed by the symmetric U-Net, the decoder output matches the size of the encoder input rather than the desired image resolution. Therefore, two additional convolutional blocks are applied to reduce the decoder output to the target image size of 28×28 pixels, ensuring consistency for effective training. The discriminator is shown in Fig. 2(c). It shares the same architecture as the encoder of the generator, with the addition of a convolutional layer with a single kernel to provide the probability of the image reconstruction’s authenticity [65]. In a similar fashion as in the input of the encoder of U-Net in the generator, the complex-valued back-scattered measurements are separated into two channels and reshaped into a square format. Since the size of the images is smaller than that of the reshaped backscattered measurements, the zero-padding technique is applied to enlarge the images. This allows the images to be concatenated with the reshaped backscattered measurements. The concatenated input data is then fed into the discriminator to judge whether the inputted images are pre-dicted reconstructed images or the ground truth reconstructed images, thereby enforcing the generator to produce reconstruc-tions that are visually realistic and free from obstruction. 

D. Loss Functions 

Let LD denote the adversarial loss for the discriminator. This loss is computed using the binary cross-entropy (BCE) function. Thus, the general form of LD is defined as: 

LD = −Exi [yi log e(xi)] − Exi [(1 − yi) log e(1 − xi)] , (6) where E denotes the expectation, xi represents the discrimina-tor’s predicted probability that the input data is actual, and yi

is the corresponding ground-truth label. A value of xi closer to 1 indicates higher realism, while a value closer to 0 indicates the data is likely generated. Let LD (Generated) and LD (Actual) denote the discrimi-nator loss terms corresponding to generated and ground-truth image reconstructions, respectively. To guide the discriminator in distinguishing actual from generated image reconstructions, 

yi is set to 0 for generated image reconstructions and 1 for AUTHOR et al. : PREPARATION OF PAPERS FOR IEEE TRANSACTIONS AND JOURNALS (MAY 2024) 5Reshape Real Reshape Real Imaginary 

(b)    

> Convolutional Layer Transpose Convolutional Layer Generated Images
> Probability Batch Normalization Layer ReLU Leaky ReLU
> Tx Rx
> Skip Connection Encoder Decoder Back-scattered Measured Signal Cov Block TransCov Block
> ==
> Soft Threhold Module
> Output Global Average Pooling Layer
> Fully Connected Layer Sigmoid Soft Thresholding Operation Imaginary
> or
> Generated images
> Ground Truth images Input

(c) (a)  

> Fig. 2. Overall network architecture highlighting the obstruction suppression and target reconstruction modules: (a) STM for adaptive feature filtering, (b) generator with encoder-decoder for feature extraction and reconstruction, (c) discriminator for adversarial quality enforcement.

actual (ground-truth) image reconstructions. LD (Actual) is thus given by: 

LD (Actual) = − Eg,R [log( D(g, R ))] , (7) where R is the ground-truth reconstructed image, and D(·)

outputs the discriminator’s estimated probability that the image is actual. Similarly, LD (Generated) is given by: 

LD (Generated) = − Eg,G (g)[(log(1 − D(g, G (g))))] , (8) where G(g) indicates the predicted image reconstructions. Combining (7) and (8), the discriminator loss function is expressed as follows: 

LD = LD (Generated) + LD (Actual) = − Eg,G (g)[(log(1 − D(g, G (g))))] 

− Eg,R [log( D(g, R ))] ,

(9) For the generator loss function, since the generator aims to “fool” the discriminator so that the generated image recon-struction is identified to be the ground-truth, yi should be one. Denoting L′ 

> D

(Generated) as the adversarial loss term for the training of the generator, L′ 

> D

(Generated) can be computed as: 

L′ 

> D

(Generated) = − Eg,G (g)[D(g, G (g))))] (10) Therefore, the total loss function for the generator is given by: 

LG = λLL1 + L′ 

> D

(Generated) = λER,G (g)[|| R − G(g)|| 1]

− Eg,G (g)[log( D(g, G (g)))] ,

(11) where ||·|| 1 denotes the L1-Norm. Employing the L1-Norm can enhance the pixel-wise similarity between the generated output and the ground truth. In addition, consistent with the Pix2Pix framework, the coefficient λ in (11) is set to 100. Several studies have empirically shown this choice to provide a good balance between the adversarial loss and the L1-Norm loss, and thus yields stable and high-quality results [39], [66], [67]. 

E. Back-scattered Data and Image Reconstruction Generation 

Firstly, the training and testing datasets consist of syn-thetic back-scattered measurement signals and their related image reconstructions. The training dataset is used to learn the general mapping between back-scattered measurements and unobstructed reconstructions, while the testing dataset, consisting of distinct samples from the same distribution, is used to evaluate the model’s performance. To generate the datasets, the fields radiated by the transmit and receive antennas are experimentally characterized using a planar antenna measurement range, calculating the sensing matrix as described in [55]. Then, the back-scattered mea-surements of obstructed targets are subsequently calculated by employing the reflectivity of these targets and using (3). Finally, the image reconstructions of these targets are obtained by employing (4). To obtain obstruction-free image reconstruc-tions, the same steps are implemented on the unobstructed targets of interest. Each sample set in the datasets consists of the back-scattered measurement of an obstructed target and the image reconstruction of the related target of interest without any obstructions, which corresponds to the input and the output of the network, respectively. The targets of interest considered in this paper are handwritten digits from the open-source dataset MNIST [68], and the obstructing objects are hand-written letters from the open-sourced dataset E-MNIST [69]. Each MNIST or E-MNIST image is first converted into a two-dimensional reflectivity distribution by normalizing the pixel values to the range [0,1], such that higher intensity pixels correspond to stronger reflectivity. This reflectivity map is 6 IEEE SENSORS JOURNAL, VOL. XX, NO. XX, XXXX 2024 

then employed as the target model in the forward model (3), together with the experimentally characterized sensing matrix, to generate the synthetic back-scattered measurements. (b) (a)     

> Fig. 3. Examples of: (a) obstructed targets and (b) the corresponding targets of interest (unobstructed). The colour scale represents normal-ized reflectivity in dB. The maximum (1) is displayed at 0dB, and values below −10 dB are clipped.

Employing MNIST as imaging targets of interest and E-MNIST as obstructions is motivated by their great variability due to the natural differences in handwriting styles. In addi-tion, the obstructing letters are randomly selected, randomly positioned, and scaled relative to the target digits, creating diverse occlusion patterns across the dataset. This combination of inherent handwriting variability and randomized occlusions enhances the diversity of the back-scattered measurements and image reconstructions, contributing to the robustness and generalization capability of cGAN-STM to different partial occlusion scenarios. When generating each obstructed target, a randomly se-lected obstructing object (from the E-MNIST dataset) is placed in front of a randomly chosen target of interest (from the MNIST dataset), resulting in an overlap that covers the target of interest. Both the obstructing object and the target are assumed to lie on the same imaging plane, corresponding to two thin layers in close contact with negligible separation (as illustrated by the target used for experimental validation in Fig. 1). This modelling simplification enables the obstacle to directly occlude the target within the 2D framework. In addition, to provide enough information for the targets of interest (digits), the obstructing objects (letters) are scaled to 60% of the targets of interest size. The impact of varying the size of the obstructing objects will be investigated later in Section IV-G. Figs. 3(a) and 3(b) respectively show two examples of the obstructed targets and their related targets of interest employed for the generation of the training and testing dataset. For visualization in the logarithmic (dB) scale, the maximum value (corresponding to 1) is displayed at 0 dB, while the lower bound of the dynamic range is clipped to -10 dB for display purposes. Note that MNIST and E-MNIST are both publicly divided into the training and testing subsets. To guarantee the distinc-tiveness between the training and testing datasets employed for this work, the obstructed targets associated with training sample sets comprise the digits and letters from the training sub-sets of MNIST and E-MNIST, respectively. Similarly, the testing sample sets are generated using the obstructed targets consisting of the digits from the testing sub-sets of MNIST and letters from the testing sub-sets of E-MNIST. 180000 sample sets and 10000 sample sets are defined as the training dataset and the testing dataset, respectively. 

F. Implementation details 

Given that these back-scattered measurements are complex-valued, the magnitude and phase components are separated into two channels before being fed into the generator. There-fore, the size of the input data is 1024 × 1 × 2. The input information is then reshaped into a square matrix format to align with the U-Net. Similarly, the size of the reconstructed images is 28 × 28 × 1, corresponding to the size of the scene. For the generator, both the convolutional and transpose convolutional layers in the U-Net architecture use 64 kernels, each with a kernel size of 4 × 4 and a stride of 2. Moreover, the convolutional layers employed for reducing the data size use 16 kernels, each sized 3 × 3 and with a stride of 1. Finally, since the output of cGAN-STM is a single channel output, a convolutional layer with a kernel size of 1 × 1 is utilized as the last layer of the generator. Similarly, to compute the probability of the authenticity of the image reconstructions, a convolutional layer with a 4 × 4 kernel is also applied at the end of the discriminator. All kernels in cGAN-STM are initialized using the Xavier initialization method [70]. The Adam optimizer with a learning rate of 1 × 10 −4 is applied to optimize the proposed generative model. To speed up the training process, the input data is standardized following a normal distribution with a mean of zero and a variance of one [17]. The output data is normalized within the range of -1 to 1. An Intel ® Core TM i7-1265U CPU and a CUDA platform with an NVIDIA Quadro RTX A40 GPU with 24 GB dedicated memory size are used for both the training and testing processes. The numerical data is generated by MATLAB 2022a, and the experiments are conducted using Tensorflow 2.6.0. Because the loss functions tend to be stable at the 100 th epoch, the number of training epochs is chosen to be 100. Training the proposed cGAN-STM required 7 hours and 48 minutes. Unless otherwise specified, all experiments use the same hyper-parameters, trained once on the noise-free training dataset (Section III-E), and no retraining is performed for subsequent evaluations. The training process of the generator and discriminator is shown in Fig. 4. As depicted in Fig. 4, the training process be-gins by feeding the back-scattered measurements of obstructed targets into the generator, which produces the corresponding reconstructed images. The generator’s parameters are updated based on the loss functions defined in (11). Following each update, the generator’s parameters are frozen, and the train-ing proceeds to update the discriminator. During this phase, the discriminator is presented with pairs consisting of back-scattered measurements and either generated or ground-truth reconstructions. Its parameters are then optimized using the loss function specified in (9). This alternating optimization strategy continues iteratively until the network converges and delivers satisfactory reconstruction performance. 

IV. R ESULTS AND DISCUSSION 

This section first introduces the evaluation metrics (Sec-tion IV-A), followed by the numerical and experimental results (Sections IV-B and IV-C)). The performance of the proposed cGAN-STM is further examined through an ablation study AUTHOR et al. : PREPARATION OF PAPERS FOR IEEE TRANSACTIONS AND JOURNALS (MAY 2024) 7Concatenation  Concatenation     

> Back -scattered
> Measurements
> Ground Truth
> Reconstructed Images
> Predicted
> Reconstructed Images
> Discriminator
> 𝓛 D(Actual) 𝓛 D(Generated)
> Addition
> Optimization
> Ground Truth
> Reconstructed Images
> Back -scattered
> Measurements
> Generator
> Predicted Reconstructed
> Images
> Concatenation
> Discriminator
> 𝓛 ’D(Generated) λ𝓛 L1
> Addition
> Optimization
> (b)
> (a)
> Fig. 4. The training process of (a) the generator and (b) the discrimina-tor.

(Section IV-D) and benchmarking comparisons with existing methods (Section IV-E). The impacts of different obstruction sizes are analyzed in Sections IV-F and IV-G. Section IV-H investigates the STM mechanism, while Section IV-I presents a noise study. Section IV-J analyzes occlusion suppression when both targets and obstructions are familiar to the model. Finally, Section IV-K evaluates the adaptability of the proposed cGAN-STM, and Section IV-L discusses its limitations and potential future work. 

A. Evaluation Metrics 

To evaluate the image reconstructions quantitatively, the normalized mean-squared-error (NMSE) [71] and the struc-tural similarity (SSIM) [72] are used as the comparison metrics. In this work, the reconstructions obtained by the conventional imaging method in (4) are considered as the reference (or ground truth) for NMSE and SSIM calculations. In this way, the performance gap between the proposed cGAN-STM and the conventional method under identical measure-ment conditions can be assessed. Specifically, the NMSE is used to calculate the pixel-wise accuracy between the ground truth reconstructed images generated by the conventional method, R, and the predicted reconstructed images generated by the cGAN-STM and other state-of-the-art models for comparison, F. The NMSE between them is given by: 

NMSE = 

> 1
> N

PNp=1 (Rp − Fp)21

> N

PNp=1 R2

> p

, (12) where the index p denotes the pixel index. Additionally, the SSIM emphasizes the information of the generated images, including structural, luminance and contrast information, ef-fectively assessing the structural and perceptual quality of the generated images. The SSIM between R and F is expressed as follows [73]: 

SSIM = (2 μRμF + C1)(2 σR,F + C2)(μ2 

> R

+ μ2 

> F

+ C1)( σ2 

> R

+ σ2 

> F

+ C2) , (13) where μR and μF respectively denote the mean values of R

and F, σ2 

> R

and σ2 

> F

respectively denote the variance values of R and F , and σR,F represents the covariance variance values between R and F . To avoid the denominator to be zero, constant parameters C1 and C2 are applied. In this work, 

C1 = 1 × 10 −4 and C2 = 9 × 10 −4 [73]. For clarity, a lower NMSE value indicates a smaller error between the predicted and ground-truth images, whereas a higher SSIM value (closer to 1) reflects greater structural similarity. Together, an NMSE near 0 and an SSIM near 1 signify high-quality image recon-structions. 

B. Numerical Evaluation of the Network Performance 

To evaluate the performance of the proposed generator, 10 testing sample sets are randomly selected from the testing dataset. The results are as shown in Fig. 5. Figs. 5(a) and 5(b) present the obstructed targets and the image reconstructions obtained using the conventional method outlined in (4). Simi-larly, Fig. 5(c) illustrates the clean targets corresponding to the targets of interest in Fig. 5(a), and their image reconstructions retrieved employing the conventional method are shown in Fig. 5(d). Fig. 5(e) shows the image reconstructions gener-ated by the proposed cGAN-STM using the back-scattered measurements of the obstructed targets depicted in Fig. 5(a). The results demonstrate that cGAN-STM successfully uses the back-scattered measurements of the obstructed targets to generate the image reconstructions of the targets of interest. Comparing Figs. 5(d) and 5(e), it is possible to observe a close agreement between the image reconstructions obtained by cGAN-STM from the back-scattered measurement from ob-structed targets, and the reconstructions of unobstructed targets using the conventional technique. Furthermore, as previously discussed, the image reconstructions in Fig. 5(b) are based on back-scattered measurements from the obstructed targets but obtained by the conventional method. Fig. 5(b) shows that the conventional method yields poor quality reconstructions when applied to obstructed targets. In particular, when the targets are obstructed, they cannot be accurately identified from the reconstructions obtained by the conventional method. In contrast, employing the proposed cGAN-STM, the quality of the generated images (Fig. 5(e)) improves significantly, pro-ducing results comparable to those obtained from unobstructed measurements. With the testing dataset, the average NMSE and SSIM are respectively calculated to be 0.066 and 0.876. The proposed cGAN-STM achieves an average reconstruction time of 0.0314 seconds on an Intel ® Core TM i7-1265U CPU, which indicates 8 IEEE SENSORS JOURNAL, VOL. XX, NO. XX, XXXX 2024 (a)      

> (b)
> (c)
> (d)
> (e)
> Fig. 5. Comparison of image reconstructions of the obstructed imaging targets based on numerically synthesized back-scattered measurements using the experimentally measured sensing matrix: (a) obstructed imaging targets; (b) the image reconstructions of (a) retrieved using the conventional method outlined in (4); (c) the targets of interest of (a); (d) the image reconstructions of (c) obtained by using the conventional method; and (e) the image reconstructions using the back-scattered measurements of obstructed targets shown in (a), obtained by the proposed cGAN-STM. The colour scale represents normalized reflectivity in dB. The maximum (1) is displayed at 0dB, and values below −10 dB are clipped.

that the computational cost is moderate and suitable for real-time applications. More importantly, cGAN-STM can recon-struct targets under obstruction, which conventional methods are fundamentally unable to accomplish. Additionally, to provide a complementary evaluation of reconstruction fidelity, a secondary analysis is conducted by directly comparing the reconstructed outputs from the testing dataset with the unobstructed and obstructed targets. Specifi-cally, the NMSE and SSIM values were calculated for three cases: 1) Reconstructions obtained using the conventional method with back-scattered measurements of obstructed targets. 2) Reconstructions obtained using the conventional method with back-scattered measurements of unobstructed tar-gets. 3) Reconstructions generated by the proposed cGAN-STM using back-scattered measurements of obstructed targets. The quantitative results are summarized in Table I. It is important to note that during training, the cGAN-STM learns a mapping from back-scattered echo measurements to the recon-struction space defined by the conventional imaging algorithm, rather than directly to the true target image. Consequently, the theoretical upper bound of the reconstruction quality is inherently constrained by the fidelity of the conventional method itself. The purpose of our approach is therefore not to surpass the conventional method but to compensate for the degradation and information loss that occur under obstructed conditions. From this perspective, achieving an SSIM of 0.543 and an NMSE of 0.226 under occlusions suggests a meaningful recovery relative to the conventional method.                       

> TABLE I COMPARISON OF METRIC VALUES BETWEEN RECONSTRUCTED AND
> TARGET IMAGES USING THE PROPOSED AND CONVENTIONAL
> METHODS
> Method cGAN-STM (proposed) Conventional Method Obstruction With Without NMSE 0.543 0.454 0.635
> SSIM 0.226 0.345 0.158

These findings demonstrate that by learning the features of the back-scattered measurements of the obstructed targets, the proposed generator is capable of removing the obstructing objects that occlude the targets of interest as well as generating high-fidelity image reconstructions. 

C. Experimental Evaluation of the Network Performance 

To further evaluate the performance of cGAN-STM in practical scenarios, the imaging setup depicted in Fig. 1 is employed. Back-scattered measurements of several obstructed targets are acquired. The image reconstructions of these ob-structed targets obtained using the conventional method in (4) are presented in Fig. 6(a). The images of the correspond-ing targets of interest, without obstructions, obtained also with the conventional method are shown in Fig. 6(b). Fig. 6(c) illustrates the reconstructions of the obstructed targets obtained by the proposed cGAN-STM. The corresponding imaging targets are indicated in the bottom-left corner of each reconstruction. NMSE and SSIM values are calculated by comparing Figs. 6(b) and 6(c) and are summarized in Table II. AUTHOR et al. : PREPARATION OF PAPERS FOR IEEE TRANSACTIONS AND JOURNALS (MAY 2024) 9(a) 

(b) 

(c) 

(i) (ii)  (iii)               

> Fig. 6. Comparison of the reconstructed images with both experimen-tally measured sensing matrix and back-scattered measurements. (a) and (b) are generated by the conventional method outlined in (4), (c) is generated by cGAN-STM. The imaging targets are displayed in the bottom left corner. The colour scale represents normalized reflectivity in dB. The maximum (1) is displayed at 0dB, and values below −10 dB are clipped. (a) (b) (c) (d) (e)
> Fig. 7. Comparison of the reconstructed images based on cGAN-STM and cGAN-STM-Lite: (a) obstructed targets; (b) targets of interest (i.e., unobstructed targets); (c) image reconstructions of the targets of interest using the conventional method (4); and image reconstructions of the obstructed targets using (d) cGAN-STM-Lite and (e) cGAN-STM. The colour scale represents normalized reflectivity in dB. The maximum (1) is displayed at 0dB, and values below −10 dB are clipped.

These results demonstrate the feasibility of applying cGAN-STM in practical settings. 

D. Ablation Study 

To evaluate the impact of the STMs, an ablation study is conducted. A baseline model, termed cGAN-STM-Lite, is constructed with the same architecture as cGAN-STM but without the STMs, and included for comparison. Fig. 7 summarizes the reconstruction results. Specifically, Figs. 7(a) and 7(b) show the obscured targets and their corresponding unobstructed counterparts, respectively. Fig. 7(c) presents the reconstruction obtained by the conventional method in (4)           

> TABLE II QUANTITATIVE COMPARISON FOR THE RESULTS PRESENTED IN FIG . 6.
> Target No. (i) (ii) (iii)
> NMSE 0.221 0.273 0.235
> SSIM 0.610 0.522 0.520

using the unobstructed targets in Fig. 7(b). In contrast, Figs. 7(d) and 7(e) display the reconstructions obtained by cGAN-STM-Lite and cGAN-STM, respectively, using the obscured targets in Fig. 7(a). Although the cGAN-STM-Lite results in Fig. 7(d) capture the target outlines, visual comparison shows that the cor-responding cGAN-STM results in Fig. 7(e) provide better resolution and visual quality. Furthermore, the average NMSE and SSIM values for cGAN-STM-Lite are listed in Table III. The results presented in Fig. 7 (qualitative) and Table II (quan-titative) between cGAN-STM-Lite and cGAN-STM confirm that the inclusion of STMs improves the reconstruction quality, highlighting their effectiveness in information filtering.        

> TABLE III COMPARISON OF METRIC VALUES WHEN WITH AND WITHOUT STM S
> Network cGAN-STM (proposed) cGAN-STM-Lite NMSE 0.066 0.084
> SSIM 0.876 0.843

E. Method Benchmarking 

As discussed in Section I, a variety of deep learning techniques have been applied to address the image reconstruc-tion problem in microwave imaging, as well as in CMI. To ensure a fair evaluation, cGAN-STM is benchmarked against representative state-of-the-art methods. Since the architecture of cGAN-STM is based on cGAN, two advanced cGAN architectures, Att-GAN [40] and DCCGAN [41], are selected. A transformer-based approach proposed by [74], termed ASR-T, is also considered. In addition, given that the architecture of the proposed generator follows a U-Net architecture, a state-of-the-art U-Net variant [75] and a state-of-the-art V-Net variant [76] are adopted for comparison, as both were proposed for image reconstruction tasks. Other approaches, such as diffusion-based models [46], are not considered be-cause of their reliance on hundreds of iterative denoising steps, which makes them computationally too expensive for CMI applications, where rapid or near real-time reconstruction is typically required. The average values of NMSE and SSIM are given in Table IV. As shown in Table IV, the NMSE value provided by cGAN-STM is lower than the values achieved when the other four approaches are employed. Similarly, the SSIM value calculated using the proposed cGAN-STM is higher than those provided by the other four methods, suggesting a better performance on the imaging problem involving obstructed imaging targets. To further compare the performance of different approaches, several testing sample sets are selected and presented in Fig. 10 IEEE SENSORS JOURNAL, VOL. XX, NO. XX, XXXX 2024 (a)                        

> (b)
> (c) (d) (f) (g) (i) (e) (h) (b) (j)
> Fig. 8. Comparison of the reconstructed images: (a) obstructed targets; (b) the reconstructed images for the obstructed targets, generated by the conventional method (4); (c) targets of interest; (d) the reconstructed images for the targets of interest, generated by the conventional method (4); (e), (f), (g), (h), (i), (j) reconstructed images of the targets of interest from (a), generated by cGAN-STM (proposed), Att-GAN [40], DCCGAN [41], ASR-T [74] and U-Net [75], and V-Net [76], respectively. The colour scale represents normalized reflectivity in dB. The maximum (1) is displayed at
> 0dB, and values below −10 dB are clipped. TABLE IV COMPARISON OF METRIC VALUES BETWEEN DIFFERENT METHODS
> Network cGAN-STM (proposed) Att-GAN [40] DCCGAN [41] ASR-T [74] U-Net [75] V-Net [76] NMSE 0.066 0.244 0.163 0.074 0.099 0.082
> SSIM 0.876 0.747 0.721 0.854 0.810 0.850

8. Fig. 8(a) shows the obstructed imaging targets, while Fig. 8(c) shows the targets of interest (unobstructed) corresponding to the obstructed imaging targets in Fig. 8(a). Figs. 8(b) and 8(d) respectively present the image reconstructions of the imaging targets shown in Figs. 8(a) and 8(c), generated by the conventional method. As can be observed, when the targets of interest are not obstructed, the conventional approach provides high-fidelity reconstructions of the targets (Fig. 8(d)). In contrast, when the targets of interest are obstructed, the targets of interest cannot be accurately imaged (Fig. 8(b)). Similarly, Figs. 8(e), 8(f), 8(g), 8(h), 8(i), and 8(j) depict the image reconstructions using the back-scattered measurements from the obstructed imaging targets shown in Fig. 8(a), generated by cGAN-STM (proposed), Att-GAN [40], DCCGAN [41], ASR-T [74], U-Net [75], and V-Net [76], respectively. It can be observed from Fig. 8 that the proposed cGAN-STM achieves higher image quality in reconstructing certain targets, such as the numbers 5, 6 and 7, compared to the other five methods. These qualitative (Fig. 8) and quantitative (Table IV) results demonstrate that the cGAN-STM is capable of providing more accurate image reconstructions when the imaging objects are obstructed. 

F. Obstruction-free Scenario Analysis 

As discussed above, the imaging targets of interest are the digits and the obstructing objects are the letters. Thus, to vali-date the information learnt by cGAN-STM, the testing dataset containing the reconstructed images of the unobstructed targets of interest and their corresponding back-scattered measure-ments are employed. Additionally, a comparison of the image reconstructions using back-scattered measurements of the un-obstructed targets of interest generated by the conventional methods and those produced by cGAN-STM is shown in Fig. 9. Figs. 9(a) and 9(b) respectively illustrate the image reconstructions by the conventional methods and the proposed cGAN-STM with the back-scattered measurements of the targets of interest. The average NMSE and SSIM values of 10000 testing sample sets associated with sole targets of interest are 0.033 and 0.927, respectively. Notably, for this testing dataset, the average NMSE value is lower and the average SSIM value is higher when compared to the results for obstructed targets. These results demonstrate that cGAN-STM effectively retrieves the information relevant to the targets of interest, regardless of the presence or absence of obstruction. AUTHOR et al. : PREPARATION OF PAPERS FOR IEEE TRANSACTIONS AND JOURNALS (MAY 2024) 11 (a)      

> (b)
> Fig. 9. Comparison of image reconstructions using the experimentally measured sensing matrix and numerically synthesized back-scattered measurements of unobstructed targets, generated from: (a) conven-tional method (outlined in (4)) and (b) the proposed generator. The unobstructed imaging targets are displayed in the upper left corner. The colour scale represents normalized reflectivity in dB. The maximum (1) is displayed at 0dB, and values below −10 dB are clipped.

G. Impact of Different Size of Obstruction 

As previously discussed, for dataset generation, the size of obstructions is set to 60% of that of the targets of interest. In this section, the impact of varying obstruction sizes on the cGAN-STM’s performance is evaluated. The sizes of obstructions range from 60% to 90% of the targets of interest size, with each size corresponding to 10000 samples. The average values of NMSE and SSIM calculated for different sizes of obstructions are given in Table V. The increase in NMSE and decrease in SSIM indicate a decline in the quality of image reconstructions generated by cGAN-STM as the size of the obstructions increases. To visualize this, as shown in Fig. 10, two obstructed targets are randomly chosen, where the size of the obstruction is changed accordingly. Fig. 10(a) shows the obstructed targets where the obstruction sizes are different. Fig. 10(b) illustrates the corresponding image reconstructions generated by the proposed cGAN-STM.                    

> TABLE V COMPARISON OF METRIC VALUES BETWEEN DIFFERENT SIZES OF OBSTRUCTIONS
> Obstruction Ratio 60% 70% 80% 90% NMSE 0.066 0.122 0.385 0.540
> SSIM 0.876 0.810 0.565 0.473

The results demonstrate that with the increase in size of obstructions, an increased amount of the key features of the targets of interest are concealed. In this situation, the received back-scattered measurements lack crucial target information from the occluded regions. As a result, cGAN-STM struggles to learn the useful information associated with the missing key features, logically leading to a degradation in the quality of reconstructions of the targets of interest. However, as can be observed in Fig. 10, even when the size of the obstructing targets is 70% of that of the targets of interest, the quality of the reconstructed images is high. (a)                  

> (b)
> 60% 70% 80% 90%
> Fig. 10. Comparison of cGAN-STM’s performance with different sizes of obstruction: (a) obstructed targets; (b) image reconstructions generated by cGAN-STM. The colour scale represents normalized reflectivity in dB. The maximum (1) is displayed at 0dB, and values below −10 dB are clipped. (a)
> (b)
> (c)
> (d)
> Unobstructed Target Obstructed Target
> Fig. 11. Resized targets with the size of (a) 4 ×4; (b) 8 ×8; (c) 16 ×
> 16; (d) 32 ×32.

H. Analysis of STM Mechanism 

To further analyze the internal behavior of STM, both quantitative and qualitative analyses are conducted: 

1) Visualization and Resolution: Since STM modules are connected to the decoder, the spatial resolution of feature maps increases progressively from 2 ×2 to 32 ×32, while the target size is 28 ×28. To enable consistent visual comparison, target images are resized accordingly. As shown in Fig. 11, when the feature maps are smaller than 8 ×8, the targets become visually indistinguishable due to excessive down-sampling. Therefore, the subsequent analyses focus on STM outputs with 16 ×16 and 32 ×32 resolutions, where both target and obstruction regions remain distinguishable for statistical evaluation. 

2) Suppression Score Definition: To evaluate the suppres-sion effect of STM at the two representative resolutions, 12 IEEE SENSORS JOURNAL, VOL. XX, NO. XX, XXXX 2024 (a)  (b)       

> Fig. 12. The average feature-map-wise mean ∆Sacross all samples sorted in descending order, with different size of feature maps: (a) 16 ×
> 16; and (b) 32 ×32.

a suppression score Sm is defined to quantify the relative reduction in activation magnitude within a given semantic region and feature map: 

Sm = 1

T

> T

X

> i=1

(|Fin |(xi, y i) − | Fout |(xi, y i)) 

|Fin |(xi, y i) + ε ⊙ m(xi, y i),

(14) where (xi, y i) denotes the pixel coordinate, |Fin | and |Fout |

denote the magnitude of the input and output feature maps, respectively. A small constant ε = 10 −8 is added to the denom-inator to avoid numerical instability when the normalization factor approaches zero. The binary mask m is derived from annotations that label obstruction and target-visible regions, ensuring a clear semantic separation for quantitative compar-ison. T denotes the total number of valid pixels within the mask. Normalizing the difference between |Fin | and |Fout |

converts it into a relative change with respect to the input magnitude, thereby mitigating the influence of individual sam-ple amplitudes on cross-sample comparisons. The magnitude values are applied because the soft-thresholding mechanism acts on the magnitude of activations rather than their sign. The higher value of Sm indicates a stronger suppression. To assess adaptive selectivity, the per-feature-map suppres-sion difference between obstruction and target-visible regions is defined as: 

∆S = Smob − Smtg , (15) where mob and mtg correspond to suppression scores in obstruction and target-visible areas, respectively.  

> 3) Quantitative Feature-map-wise Analysis:

To identify rep-resentative feature maps for visualization, a quantitative anal-ysis of feature map-wise suppression behavior is conducted using the per-feature-map suppression difference ∆S. For each STM size, ∆S is computed per feature map and averaged across samples, then sorted in descending order. The averaged 

∆S values for two feature map sizes are shown in Fig. 12. As observed, ∆S exhibits a non-flat distribution across feature maps, indicating that the STM modulates feature suppression in a feature-map-dependent manner rather than performing uniform attenuation.  

> 4) Qualitative Feature Map Analysis:

Feature maps with positive ∆S correspond to stronger suppression in obstruction regions than in target-visible regions, whereas negative ∆S

indicates stronger suppression in target-visible regions. To interpret these effects, representative feature maps from three test samples are visualized in Fig. 13. Figs. 13(a) and (b) present the targets of interest and their obstructed views. Figs. 13(c), (d) and (e) present the input and output feature maps together with their suppression heat, at the 16 × 16 resolution, while Figs. 13(f), (g) and (h) show the corresponding results at the 32 × 32 resolution. Figs. 13(i) and (ii) indicate the top-ranked feature map and bottom-ranked feature map. As shown in Fig. 13(i), the suppression heat map aligns with non-target areas (including obstruction and background), indi-cating that STM selectively suppresses activations unrelated to the target. This spatial correspondence is consistent across samples, suggesting a stable non-target suppression pattern. On the other hand, the suppression heat map of the bottom-ranked feature map ∆S shows that the suppression area covers the target area. To understand the behaviour of the suppression on target area, a quantitative analysis is performed using 32×32 feature maps. In this analysis, not only the cosine similarity [77] is used, a suppression strength ( rs) between the input and output feature maps within the target region is also used: 

rs = 1 − 1

P mtg 

X 

> (x,y ): mtg (x,y )=1

|Fout ||Fin | + ε . (16) Across three examples, the cosine similarity values are 0.987, 0.991, and 0.994, and suppression strength values are 0.224, 0.175, and 0.127. These results indicate that STM mainly reduces feature magnitude while largely preserving the feature direction within the target region. This behavior aligns with prior studies showing that magnitude control enhances training stability and mitigates over-fitting [78]–[80].    

> 5) Analysis of the Learned Threshold Values τ:

As described in Section III-B, the threshold value τ for each sample, layer, and feature map is generated by two fully connected networks, resulting in sample-dependent variations. To visualize this adaptability, the mean, median, and variance of τ across test samples are summarized in Fig. 14. The average feature-map-wise means, sorted in descending order for different feature map sizes, show substantial variations both across feature maps and samples. These results indicate that STM adapts its threshold values to input features rather than applying fixed or global parameters. To further assess adaptability, obstruction types are characterized by varying obstruction sizes (60%–90% of the target area, as defined in Section IV-F). As shown in Fig. 15, the mean τ per feature map changes with obstruction levels. Although the overall trend shows higher thresholds with increased obstruction, several layers display local non-monotonic variations. This behavior reflects STM’s sensitivity to local activation statistics rather than the ob-struction ratio itself. When occlusions dominate spatially and become homogeneous, feature variance decreases, leading to smaller thresholds. Such non-monotonic adaptation confirms that STM acts as an input-dependent modulation mechanism rather than a static denoising operator. To examine whether STM performs feature selection, the receiver operating characteristic–area under the curve (ROC–AUC) metric [81] is computed. To begin with, a binary mask is defined by assigning 1 to non-target regions (including obstruction and background) and 0 to target-visible regions. By the way of this, an ROC-AUC value closer to 1 indicates AUTHOR et al. : PREPARATION OF PAPERS FOR IEEE TRANSACTIONS AND JOURNALS (MAY 2024) 13 (a)  (b)  (c)  (d)  (e)  (f)  (g)  (h) 

Size: 16   16  Size: 32   32 

(i)

(i)

(i)

(ii) 

(ii) 

(ii)          

> Fig. 13. Comparison of (i) top-ranked feature map and (ii) bottom-ranked feature map with three example targets. For the 16 ×16 size, (c) input feature maps; (d) output feature maps; and (e) Difference Heat Map. For the 32 ×32 size, (f) input feature maps; (g) output feature maps; and (h) Difference Heat Map.

a higher relationship between the suppression and the non-target region. The average ROC-AUC is calculated to be 0.701, indicating a consistent spatial bias toward non-target suppression. Given that STM operates without supervision on obstruction masks, this discrimination supports its role as an adaptive, semantically selective mechanism rather than a generic feature selector. 

6) Conclusion: In summary, STM functions as an input-dependent suppression module that selectively attenuates non-target features without explicit obstruction recognition, thereby enhancing feature discrimination and model robustness. 

I. Noise Study 

To assess the performance of the proposed cGAN-STM under noisy conditions, Gaussian white noise with SNR levels of 0, 5, 10, and 15 dB is added to the testing back-scattered measurements, due to its statistical similarity to typical radar noise [82]. For each SNR level, 1000 randomly selected samples from the testing dataset are corrupted with Gaussian noise to generate the noisy inputs. Reconstruction performance is quantified using NMSE and SSIM, with results summarized in Table VI. It can be observed that the reconstruction quality decreases at lower SNR levels. At 15 dB, cGAN-STM achieves an NMSE of 0.168 and an SSIM of 0.700, indicating that the main structural features of the targets are largely preserved despite minor degradation relative to the noise-free case. At lower SNRs, such as 0 and 5 dB, quantitative performance de-teriorates, showing that noise starts to affect the reconstruction quality. Representative reconstructed images are shown in Figure 16. Specifically, Figs. 16(a) and (b) present the reconstructions of unobstructed and obstructed targets by using the conventional method outlined in (4), respectively, while Fig. 16(c) shows the cGAN-STM reconstructions for obstructed targets. Although performance metrics degrade significantly at very low SNRs, the target outlines remain visually recognizable.                  

> TABLE VI COMPARISON OF CGAN-STM PERFORMANCE UNDER DIFFERENT
> SNR L EVELS .
> SNR (dB) 0510 15 NMSE 0.565 0.412 0.278 0.168
> SSIM 0.183 0.322 0.513 0.700

In addition, a robustness analysis under noisy conditions is 14 IEEE SENSORS JOURNAL, VOL. XX, NO. XX, XXXX 2024 (c)  (d)  

> (e)
> (a)(b)

Fig. 14. The average feature-map-wise mean τ across all samples at descending order, with different size of feature maps: (a) 2 ×2; (b)4 ×4; (c) 8 ×8; (d) 16 ×16 and (e) 32 ×32. (a)  (b) 

> (d)
> (e)
> (c)

Fig. 15. The average feature-map-wise mean τ across the samples with different size of obstructions at descending order, with different size of feature maps: (a) 2 ×2; (b)4 ×4; (c) 8 ×8; (d) 16 ×16 and (e) 32 ×32. (a) 

(b) 

(c) 

0 dB  10 dB  15 dB 5 dB 

(d)

Fig. 16. Comparisons of image reconstructions are presented using: (a) the conventional method described in (4) applied to back-scattered measurements from an unobstructed target of interest; (b) the same conventional method applied to measurements from an obstructed target; (c) the proposed cGAN-STM approach applied to measurements from the obstructed target; and (d) the cGAN-STM-Lite model applied to measurements from the obstructed target. The colour scale represents normalized reflectivity in dB. The maximum (1) is displayed at 0 dB, and values below −10 dB are clipped. 

Fig. 17. Average NMSE and SSIM of reconstructed images obtained by cGAN-STM and cGAN-STM-Lite under different SNR levels. 

conducted to further investigate the cause of the performance degradation. In particular, Figs. 16(c) and (d) compare re-constructions obtained by cGAN-STM and cGAN-STM-Lite, clearly demonstrating the superior performance of cGAN-STM under noisy conditions. As illustrated in Fig. 17, with increasing SNR, NMSE decreases and SSIM increases for both models. However, across all noise levels, cGAN-STM consistently achieves lower NMSE and higher SSIM than cGAN-STM-Lite, indicating that the STM does not introduce additional sensitivity to noise. Since STM is not the source of the degradation, the observed AUTHOR et al. : PREPARATION OF PAPERS FOR IEEE TRANSACTIONS AND JOURNALS (MAY 2024) 15 

noise sensitivity can be attributed mainly to the inherent limitations of GANs, which are known to be unstable to input perturbations [83]–[85]. In light of this, incorporating noise-aware modules or physics-informed priors with the proposed cGAN-STM will be an important direction for future work to further enhance robustness against noise. (a)      

> (b)
> (c)
> (d)
> (e)
> Fig. 18. Comparison of image reconstructions of the obstructed imaging targets based on numerically synthesized back-scattered mea-surements using the experimentally measured sensing matrix: (a) ob-structed imaging targets; (b) the image reconstructions of (a) retrieved using conventional method outlined in (4); (c) the unobstructed targets of interest; (d) the image reconstructions of (c) obtained using the conventional method; and (e) the image reconstructions using the back-scattered measurements of obstructed targets shown in (a), obtained by the proposed cGAN-STM. The colour scale represents normalized reflectivity in dB. The maximum (1) is displayed at 0dB, and values below −10 dB are clipped.

J. Analysis of Occlusion Suppression with Structurally Similar and Previously Learned Targets 

To analyze the model’s suppression behavior when pre-viously learned target classes act as occluders, two related experiments are conducted. 

1) Target-Occluder Role Reversal Test: In this setting, E-MNIST letters are used as the targets of interest, while MNIST digits serve as obstructing objects. In other words, the databases for the targets and occluders are swapped (from MNIST to E-MNIST and from E-MNIST to MNIST, respec-tively) compared with the previous studies. Since MNIST digits were used as targets during training, reusing them as occluders enables testing for potential memorization effects. This experiment therefore serves as a sanity check against overfitting and assesses the model’s robustness to familiar but irrelevant occlusions. Following the data generation procedure in Section III-E, 1000 unseen letters and digits are randomly selected from the MNIST and E-MNIST testing datasets, respectively. Each letter is obstructed by a digit, resulting in 1000 back-scattered measurements. Six representative examples are shown in Fig. 18. Figs. 18(a) and 18(c) present the obstructed and unobstructed targets, and Figs. 18(b) and 18(d) show their corresponding re-constructions using the conventional method described in (4). (a)  (b)  (c)  (d)  (e)       

> Fig. 19. Comparison of image reconstructions of the obstructed imaging targets based on numerically synthesized back-scattered mea-surements using the experimentally measured sensing matrix: (a) ob-structed imaging targets; (b) the image reconstructions of (a) retrieved using conventional method outlined in (4); (c) the unobstructed targets of interest; (d) the image reconstructions of (c) obtained using the conventional method; and (e) the image reconstructions using the back-scattered measurements of obstructed targets shown in (a), obtained by the proposed cGAN-STM. The colour scale represents normalized reflectivity in dB. The maximum (1) is displayed at 0dB, and values below −10 dB are clipped. (b)
> (a)
> Fig. 20. Examples of targets used for calibration: (a) The targets of interest (unobstructed) and (b) the obstructed targets. The colour scale represents normalized reflectivity in dB. The maximum (1) is displayed at 0 dB, and values below -10 dB are clipped.

Fig. 18(e) illustrates the reconstruction results obtained by the proposed cGAN-STM from the back-scattered measurements in Fig. 18(a). The average NMSE and SSIM are 0.171 and 0.615, respectively. 

2) Same-category Occlusion Test: To further examine the model’s performance when both targets and occluders belong to the same domain, another experiment is conducted using only the MNIST dataset. A total of 1000 digits are randomly selected as targets and another 1000 as occluders, both from the MNIST testing set. Following the same data generation process, 1000 back-scattered measurements of obstructed dig-its are obtained. Three representative examples are shown in Fig. 19. Figs. 19(a) and (c) display the obstructed and unobstructed targets, and Figs. 19(b) and (d) present their reconstructions using the conventional method described in (4). Fig. 19(e) shows the reconstructions obtained by the proposed cGAN-STM using the back-scattered measurements from Fig. 19(a). The average NMSE and SSIM are 0.068 and 0.871, respec-tively. 16 IEEE SENSORS JOURNAL, VOL. XX, NO. XX, XXXX 2024 (a)  

> (b)
> (c)
> (d)
> (e)
> Fig. 21. Comparison of image reconstructions of the obstructed imag-ing targets based on numerically synthesized back-scattered measure-ments using the experimentally measured sensing matrix: (a) obstructed imaging targets; (b) the image reconstructions of (a) retrieved using the conventional method outlined in (4); (c) the targets of interest of (a); (d) the image reconstructions of (c) obtained by using the conventional method; and (e) the image reconstructions using the back-scattered measurements of obstructed targets shown in (a), obtained by the cal-ibrated cGAN-STM. The colour scale represents normalized reflectivity in dB. The maximum (1) is displayed at 0 dB, and values below -10 dB are clipped.

Overall, the results indicate that the proposed cGAN–STM also exhibits adaptive suppression behavior toward previously learned target classes, effectively reducing non-target featuress even when the occluders originate from familiar categories. 

K. Generalization and Adaptability Analysis 

To investigate the adaptability of the proposed cGAN-STM, experiments are conducted using unseen canonical-shaped targets. Specifically, three geometric shapes, namely disk, square, and triangle, are considered as the basis for constructing the obstructed targets. Each shape includes 150 randomly rotated and resized versions. For each obstructed target, the target of interest is selected from one of the three shapes, while the obstruction is chosen from the remaining two. The same experimentally measured sensing matrix and imaging configuration are used to ensure consistency with the previous setup. The geometric testing dataset is generated following the procedure described in Section III-E. To improve reconstruction quality, the previously trained cGAN-STM is further calibrated using a calibrated dataset consisting of a limited amount of additional data. In the cal-ibrated dataset, both the imaging targets and the obstructions are randomly selected from parallelogram and hexagon shapes, with representative examples shown in Fig. 20. Fig. 20(a) shows the targets of interest, while Fig. 20(b) shows the related obstructed targets. The calibrated dataset is also generated following the steps in Section III-E. The calibrated dataset contains 300 samples in total. The cGAN-STM was calibrated for 10 epochs until the loss converged, using a learning rate of 1 × 10 −5, which is one-tenth of the original learning rate used in the initial training. Representative reconstruction results are presented in Fig. 21 to qualitatively illustrate the typical reconstruction behavior observed across the test samples. Figs. 21(a) and (c) show the obstructed and unobstructed targets, and Figs. 21(b) and (d) present the reconstructed images using the conventional method (4). Fig. 21(e) presents the image reconstructions using the calibrated cGAN-STM and the back-scattered measure-ments from Fig. 21(a). Comparing Fig. 21(e) with Fig. 21(b) reveals that the proposed cGAN-STM significantly suppresses non-target features introduced by the obstructing targets, par-ticularly along object edges. Quantitatively, the average NMSE and SSIM values of the geometric testing dataset are 0.071 and 0.854, respectively. To further evaluate the performance of the calibrated cGAN-STM under diverse physical scattering conditions, three ad-ditional numerical datasets are generated. These datasets are based on similar canonical geometries but incorporate varia-tions in reflectivity, target size, and orientation to emulate more realistic CMI scenarios. The representative reconstruction re-sults are shown in Figs. 22(i), (ii), and (iii). These images present the results when the obstructions have reflectivity levels of 0.4, 0.6 and 0.8, respectively. The obstructed targets are displayed in Fig. 22(a) whilst the corresponding targets of interest are depicted in Fig. 22(c). The image reconstructions of Figs. 22(a) and 22(c) obtained with the conventional method are shown in Figs. 22(b) and (d), respectively. Fig. 22(e) presents the image reconstructions using the calibrated cGAN-STM and the back-scattered measurements from Fig. 22(a). Additionally, the average metric values are shown in Table VII.           

> TABLE VII AVERAGE METRIC VALUES BETWEEN RECONSTRUCTED IMAGES USING THE PROPOSED C GAN-STM AND CONVENTIONAL METHODS WHEN THE TARGET OF INTEREST HAS DIFFERENT REFLECTIVITY .
> Reflectivity 0.4 0.6 0.8 NMSE 0.143 0.112 0.088
> SSIM 0.798 0.811 0.833

In addition, a full training baseline is implemented, where the model is trained from scratch using the same 300-sample calibration dataset as used in the lightweight adaptation. The full training baseline achieves an NMSE of 0.099 and an SSIM of 0.773 on the geometric testing dataset. Under this limited data calibration setting, the proposed lightweight adaptation achieves improved reconstruction performance compared with full training from scratch, indicating that the pretrained net-work can be effectively adapted to previously unseen geomet-ric shapes using only a small calibration dataset. These results suggest that the proposed cGAN-STM can be efficiently adapted to new domains through lightweight calibration with a small number of samples. This adaptation process can be interpreted as a calibration step, where the model is adjusted to a new measurement environment using a limited set of representative samples. Furthermore, the results indicate that the network learns transferable representations rather than memorizing specific target or obstruction shapes, enabling efficient adaptation to previously unseen configura-AUTHOR et al. : PREPARATION OF PAPERS FOR IEEE TRANSACTIONS AND JOURNALS (MAY 2024) 17 (a) 

(b) 

(c) 

(d) 

(e) 

(i) (ii)  (iii)  

> Fig. 22. Comparison of image reconstructions of the obstructed imaging targets with reflectivity levels of (i) 0.4, (ii) 0.6, and (iii) 0.8. Each group (i)–(iii) corresponds to a different reflectivity level, and within each group: (a) obstructed imaging targets; (b) the image reconstructions of (a) retrieved using the conventional method outlined in (4); (c) the targets of interest of (a); (d) the image reconstructions of (c) obtained by using the conventional method; and (e) the image reconstructions using the back-scattered measurements of obstructed targets shown in (a), obtained with the proposed cGAN-STM after additional training. The colour scale represents normalized reflectivity in dB. The maximum (1) is displayed at 0 dB, and values below -10 dB are clipped.

tions. 

L. Limitation and Future Work 

Although the proposed cGAN–STM demonstrates strong effectiveness in reconstructing obstructed targets, its perfor-mance may degrade under extreme conditions. These include highly noisy environments, excessively large occlusions, or scenarios where obstructions dominate the feature space, lead-ing to reduced suppression selectivity. Future work will aim to enhance the STM’s robustness and adaptability under such conditions through improved feature modulation, attention-guided suppression, or physics-informed learning strategies. Also, the datasets used in this study also impose constraints on physical realism. While the MNIST and E-MNIST datasets are well suited for demonstrating the feasibility of the pro-posed method, they provide a simplified representation of the CMI problem. Realistic scenarios involve targets and clutter with continuous-valued reflectivity distributions, complex 3D geometries. Future work will consider complex targets with varying material properties to further optimize and validate the proposed model. 

V. C ONCLUSION 

This article proposed a novel cGAN integrated with deep learning based soft-threshold modules, called cGAN-STM, to address the image reconstruction problem in CMI scenarios involving obstructed imaging targets. The proposed cGAN-STM learns the information related to the targets of interest from the back-scattered measurements of the obstructed tar-gets, generating the image reconstructions of the targets of interest. The model was evaluated with 10000 testing sample sets, where the obtained key image reconstruction metrics, namely NMSE and SSIM, were 0.066 and 0.876, respectively. Experimental tests further demonstrated the feasibility of the approach in practical environments. Comparisons with other state-of-the-art learning models in the literature confirmed the advantages of cGAN-STM. Additional experiments, including STM mechanism analysis, variations in occluder size, tar-get–occluder role reversal, different SNR noise conditions, and adaptability on unseen geometric shaped targets, showed its effectiveness and potential scalability to more complex targets. By means of this approach, the need for the image recon-struction step and the required manual work for removing the obstruction can be essentially eliminated. This approach offers the potential to enhance the overall efficiency of CMI, which can be particularly useful in some contexts and applications, such as security screening. 

REFERENCES     

> [1] O. Yurduseven et al. , “Frequency-diverse computational direction of arrival estimation technique,” Sci. Rep. , vol. 9, no. 1, p. 16704, 2019. 18 IEEE SENSORS JOURNAL, VOL. XX, NO. XX, XXXX 2024

[2] J. He, F. Yin, and H. C. So, “A framework for millimeter-wave multi-user slam and its low-cost realization,” Signal Processing , vol. 209, p. 109018, 2023. [3] G. Zhang et al. , “Direct target localization with quantized measurements in noncoherent distributed mimo radar systems,” IEEE Trans. Geosci. Remote Sens. , vol. 61, pp. 1–18, 2023. [4] O. Yurduseven et al. , “Frequency-diverse computational automotive radar technique for debris detection,” IEEE Sens. J. , vol. 20, no. 22, pp. 13 167–13 177, 2020. [5] K. B. Cooper et al. , “G-band radar for humidity and cloud remote sensing,” IEEE Trans. Geosci. Remote Sens. , vol. 59, no. 2, pp. 1106– 1117, 2021. [6] S. Song et al. , “An effective image reconstruction enhancement method with convolutional reweighting for near-field SAR,” IEEE Antennas Wirel. Propag. Lett. , pp. 1–5, 2024. [7] M. Garc´ ıa-Fern´ andez et al. , “Comparison of scanning strategies in uav-mounted multichannel gpr-sar systems using antenna arrays,” IEEE J. Sel. Top. Appl. Earth Observ. Remote Sens. , vol. 17, pp. 3571–3586, 2024. [8] T. Fromenteze et al. , “A transverse spectrum deconvolution technique for mimo short-range fourier imaging,” IEEE Trans. Geosci. Remote Sens. , vol. 57, no. 9, pp. 6311–6324, 2019. [9] A. Moreira et al. , “A tutorial on synthetic aperture radar,” IEEE Geosci. Remote Sens. Mag. , vol. 1, no. 1, pp. 6–43, 2013. [10] S. Song et al. , “Efficient image reconstruction methods based on structured sparsity for short-range radar,” IEEE Trans. Geosci. Remote Sens. , pp. 1–1, 2024. [11] J.-C. Bolomey, “Overview of fast sar assessment techniques,” in 2008 International Workshop on Antenna Technology: Small Antennas and Novel Metamaterials . IEEE, 2008, pp. 47–50. [12] M. Garc´ ıa-Fern´ andez et al. , “Array-based ground penetrating synthetic aperture radar on board an unmanned aerial vehicle for enhanced buried threats detection,” IEEE Trans. Geosci. Remote Sens. , vol. 61, pp. 1–18, 2023. [13] J. Chen et al. , “Real-time processing of spaceborne sar data with non-linear trajectory based on variable PRF,” IEEE Trans. Geosci. Remote Sens. , vol. 60, pp. 1–12, 2021. [14] R. J. Mailloux, Electronically scanned arrays , 2007. [15] R. C. Hansen, Phased array antennas , 2009. [16] A. M. Molaei et al. , “Advanced near-field radar imaging approaches in security: An overview on signal processing challenges, opportunities, and future directions,” IEEE Signal Process. Magaz. , vol. 42, no. 1, pp. 126–146, 2025. [17] J. Zhang et al. , “Deep learning for sensing matrix prediction in computa-tional microwave imaging with coded-apertures,” IEEE Access , vol. 12, pp. 16 844–16 855, 2024. [18] M. F. Imani et al. , “Review of metasurface antennas for computational microwave imaging,” IEEE Trans. Antennas Propag. , vol. 68, no. 3, pp. 1860–1875, 2020. [19] J. Hunt et al. , “Metamaterial apertures for computational imaging,” 

Science , vol. 339, no. 6117, pp. 310–313, 2013. [20] T. Sleasman et al. , “Dynamic metamaterial aperture for microwave imaging,” Appl. Phys. Lett. , vol. 107, no. 20, p. 204104, 2015. [21] G. ´Alvarez Narciandi et al. , “Dynamic metasurface antenna-based mills-cross aperture for 3d computational microwave imaging,” IEEE Antennas Wirel. Propag. Lett. , pp. 1–5, 2024. [22] O. Yurduseven et al. , “Millimeter-wave spotlight imager using dynamic holographic metasurface antennas,” Optics Exp. , vol. 25, no. 15, pp. 18 230–18 249, 2017. [23] A. Li et al. , “Frequency-diverse reflection metasurface antenna design for computational microwave imaging,” IEEE Open J. Antennas Propag. ,pp. 1–1, 2024. [24] M. Zhao et al. , “Dual-polarized frequency-diverse metaimager for computational polarimetric imaging,” IEEE Trans. Antennas Propag. ,vol. 72, no. 7, pp. 5479–5488, 2024. [25] T. V. Hoang et al. , “Spatial diversity improvement in frequency-diverse computational imaging with a multi-port antenna,” Results Phys. , vol. 22, p. 103906, 2021. [26] T. Sleasman et al. , “Computational imaging with dynamic metasurfaces: A recipe for simple and low-cost microwave imaging,” IEEE Antennas Propag. Mag. , vol. 64, no. 4, pp. 123–134, 2022. [27] O. Yurduseven et al. , “Design and simulation of a frequency-diverse aperture for imaging of human-scale targets,” IEEE Access , vol. 4, pp. 5436–5451, 2016. [28] R. Guo et al. , “A nonlinear model compression scheme based on variational autoencoder for microwave data inversion,” IEEE Trans. Antennas Propag. , vol. 70, no. 11, pp. 11 059–11 069, 2022. [29] R. Zheng et al. , “Model-based knowledge-driven learning approach for enhanced high-resolution automotive radar imaging,” IEEE Trans. Radar Syst. , vol. 3, pp. 709–723, 2025. [30] R. Benny et al. , “Deep learning based non-iterative solution to the inverse problem in microwave imaging,” Prog. Electromagn. Res. M ,vol. 109, pp. 231–240, 2022. [31] K. Xu et al. , “Deep learning-based inversion methods for solving inverse scattering problems with phaseless data,” IEEE Trans. Antennas Propag. ,vol. 68, no. 11, pp. 7457–7470, 2020. [32] C.-C. Chiu et al. , “An enhanced deep learning scheme for electromag-netic imaging of uniaxial objects,” IEEE Trans. Microw. Theory Tech. ,vol. 72, no. 7, pp. 3955–3969, 2024. [33] H. H. Zhang et al. , “Enhanced two-step deep-learning approach for electromagnetic-inverse-scattering problems: Frequency extrapolation and scatterer reconstruction,” IEEE Trans. Antennas Propag. , vol. 71, no. 2, pp. 1662–1672, 2023. [34] W. Shao and Y. Du, “Microwave imaging by deep learning network: Feasibility and training method,” IEEE Trans. Antennas Propag. , vol. 68, no. 7, pp. 5626–5635, 2020. [35] Z. Wu et al. , “A physics-induced deep learning scheme for electromag-netic inverse scattering,” IEEE Trans. Microw. Theory Tech. , vol. 72, no. 2, pp. 927–947, 2024. [36] C. Ledig et al. , “Photo-realistic single image super-resolution using a generative adversarial network,” in Proc. IEEE Conf. Comput. Vision Pattern Recognit. , 2017, pp. 105–114. [37] A. Dosovitskiy and T. Brox, “Generating images with perceptual simi-larity metrics based on deep networks,” in Adv. Neural Inf. Proc. Syst. ,vol. 29, 2016. [38] I. Goodfellow et al. , “Generative adversarial networks,” Commun. ACM ,vol. 63, no. 11, pp. 139–144, 2020. [39] P. Isola et al. , “Image-to-Image Translation with Conditional Adversarial Networks,” in Proc. IEEE Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit. (CVPR) ,2017, pp. 5967–5976. [40] R. Song et al. , “Learning-based inversion method for solving elec-tromagnetic inverse scattering with mixed boundary conditions,” IEEE Trans. Antennas Propag. , vol. 70, no. 8, pp. 6218–6228, 2022. [41] H. M. Yao et al. , “Deep-learning-based source reconstruction method using deep convolutional conditional generative adversarial network,” 

IEEE Trans. Microw. Theory Tech. , vol. 72, no. 5, pp. 2949–2960, 2024. [42] K. Xu et al. , “Learning-assisted inversion for solving nonlinear inverse scattering problem,” IEEE Trans. Microw. Theory Tech. , vol. 71, no. 6, pp. 2384–2395, 2023. [43] H. Zhou et al. , “Deep unfolding contrast source inversion for strong scatterers via generative adversarial mechanism,” IEEE Trans. Microw. Theory Tech. , vol. 70, no. 11, pp. 4966–4979, 2022. [44] J. Zhang, G. ´Alvarez Narciandi, M. Garc´ ıa-Fern´ andez, R. Sharma, J. Zhang, P. del Hougne, M. Ali Babar Abbasi, and O. Yurduseven, “Classigan: Joint image reconstruction and classification in computa-tional microwave imaging,” IEEE Trans. Radar Syst. , vol. 3, pp. 441– 452, 2025. [45] X. Bi et al. , “Diffusionemis: Diffusion model for 3-d electromagnetic inverse scattering,” IEEE Trans. Geosci. Remote Sens. , vol. 62, pp. 1–12, 2024. [46] J. Ho, A. Jain, and P. Abbeel, “Denoising diffusion probabilistic models,” 

Advances in neural information processing systems , vol. 33, pp. 6840– 6851, 2020. [47] A. Horsley and D. S. Thaler, “Microwave detection and quantification of water hidden in and on building materials: Implications for healthy buildings and microbiome studies,” BMC Infectious Diseases , vol. 19, no. 1, p. 67, 2019. [48] S. S. Ahmed, A. Schiessl, F. Gumbmann, M. Tiebout, S. Methfessel, and L.-P. Schmidt, “Advanced microwave imaging,” IEEE Microwave Magazine , vol. 13, no. 6, pp. 26–43, 2012. [49] H. Fu, F. Dai, and L. Hong, “Metasurface aperture design for far-field computational microwave imaging beyond rayleigh diffraction limitations,” Trans. Microw. Theory Tech. , vol. 72, no. 1, pp. 223–241, 2024. [50] M. Zhao et al. , “Microwave integrated sensing and imaging using reconfigurable metacavity,” Trans. Microw. Theory Tech. , vol. 73, no. 8, pp. 5592–5606, 2025. [51] L. Pulido-Mancera et al. , “Application of range migration algorithms to imaging with a dynamic metasurface antenna,” J. Opt. Soc. Am. B ,vol. 33, no. 10, pp. 2082–2092, Oct 2016. [52] D. S. Shumakov and N. K. Nikolova, “Fast quantitative microwave imaging with scattered-power maps,” Trans. Microw. Theory Tech. ,vol. 66, no. 1, pp. 439–449, 2018. AUTHOR et al. : PREPARATION OF PAPERS FOR IEEE TRANSACTIONS AND JOURNALS (MAY 2024) 19 

[53] D. Tajik, R. Kazemivala, and N. K. Nikolova, “Real-time imaging with simultaneous use of born and rytov approximations in quantitative microwave holography,” Trans. Microw. Theory Tech. , vol. 70, no. 3, pp. 1896–1909, 2022. [54] G. Lipworth et al. , “Comprehensive simulation platform for a metama-terial imaging system,” Applied optics , vol. 54, no. 31, pp. 9343–9353, 2015. [55] M. Garc´ ıa-Fern´ andez et al. , “Single channel frequency-diverse com-putational imaging system for through-the-wall sensing,” IEEE Trans. Geosci. Remote Sens. , vol. 62, pp. 1–10, 2024. [56] T. Sleasman et al. , “Experimental synthetic aperture radar with dynamic metasurfaces,” IEEE Trans. Antennas Propag. , vol. 65, no. 12, pp. 6864– 6877, 2017. [57] J. Woodworth and R. Chartrand, “Compressed sensing recovery via nonconvex shrinkage penalties,” Inverse Problems , vol. 32, no. 7, p. 075004, 2016. [58] M. Zhao, S. Zhong, X. Fu, B. Tang, and M. Pecht, “Deep residual shrinkage networks for fault diagnosis,” IEEE Trans. Industr. Inform. ,vol. 16, no. 7, pp. 4681–4690, 2020. [59] M. Lin et al. , “Network in network,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Learn. Represent. (ICLR) , 2014. [60] F. Wang, D. Chen, and X. Zhang, “Mental fatigue detection of construc-tion equipment operators based on eeg collected by a novel valve-type semidry electrode using deep residual shrinkage networks under real construction environment,” IEEE Trans. Instrum. Meas. , vol. 73, pp. 1– 14, 2024. [61] M. Khalid et al. , “Empirical evaluation of activation functions in deep convolution neural network for facial expression recognition,” in Int. Conf. Telecommun. Signal Proc. , 2020, pp. 204–207. [62] J. Long et al. , “Fully convolutional networks for semantic segmentation,” in Proc. IEEE Conf. Comput. Vision Pattern Recognit. (CVPR) , 2015. [63] K. He et al. , “Identity mappings in deep residual networks,” in Comput. Vision–ECCV 2016 , 2016, pp. 630–645. [64] Y. Dai et al. , “Integrating multi spatial-temporal information with globally attentive gated convolutional network for transmission line icing tension prediction,” in Proc. 2023 8th Int. Conf. Cloud Comput. Big Data Anal. (ICCCBDA) , 2023, pp. 208–214. [65] J. Laviada et al. , “Artifact mitigation for high-resolution near-field sar images by means of conditional generative adversarial networks,” IEEE Trans. Instrum. Meas. , vol. 71, pp. 1–11, 2022. [66] M. Tan et al. , “Electromagnetic imaging boosted visual object recog-nition under difficult visual conditions,” IEEE Trans. Geosci. Remote Sens. , vol. 61, pp. 1–12, 2023. [67] J. Zhang et al. , “Sensing matrix prediction from back-scattered data in computational microwave imaging,” IEEE Antennas Wirel. Propag. Lett. ,pp. 1–5, 2024. [68] Y. LeCun et al. , “Gradient-based learning applied to document recogni-tion,” Proc. IEEE , vol. 86, no. 11, pp. 2278–2324, 1998. [69] G. Cohen, S. Afshar, J. Tapson, and A. van Schaik, “Emnist: Extending mnist to handwritten letters,” in 2017 Int. Joint Conf. Neural Networks (IJCNN) , 2017, pp. 2921–2926. [70] X. Glorot et al. , “Understanding the difficulty of training deep feedfor-ward neural networks,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Artif. Intell. Statist. , vol. 9, 2010, pp. 249–256. [71] A. M. Molaei et al. , “Fast processing approach for near-field terahertz imaging with linear sparse periodic array,” IEEE Sens. J. , vol. 22, no. 5, pp. 4410–4424, 2022. [72] R. Sharma et al. , “3-D super-resolution of coded aperture millimeter-wave images using complex-valued convolutional neural network,” IEEE Sens. J. , vol. 22, no. 21, pp. 20 921–20 936, 2022. [73] Z. Wang et al. , “Image quality assessment: from error visibility to structural similarity,” IEEE Trans. Image Process. , vol. 13, no. 4, pp. 600–612, 2004. [74] C. Xiao, H. Dou, H. Li, R. Jin, R. Zhai, W. Wang, R. Lv, and Y. Li, “Image reconstruction of synthetic aperture radiometer by transformer,” 

IEEE Trans. Geosci. Remote Sens. , vol. 61, pp. 1–15, 2023. [75] M. F. Maricar, A. Zakaria, and N. Qaddoumi, “Attention-Unet for electromagnetic inverse scattering problems in microwave imaging,” 

IEEE Trans. Microw. Theory Tech. , pp. 1–15, 2024. [76] X. Guo et al. , “Deep learning approach for microwave imaging in broad frequency band based on physics-driven loss and deep convolutional V-Net structure,” IEEE Microw. Wireless Technol. Lett. , vol. 35, no. 9, pp. 1264–1267, 2025. [77] P. Xia et al. , “Learning similarity with cosine similarity ensemble,” Inf. Sci. , vol. 307, pp. 39–52, 2015. [78] Y. Bengio et al. , Deep learning , 2017, vol. 1. [79] R. Moradi et al. , “A survey of regularization strategies for deep models,” 

Artificial Intelligence Review , vol. 53, no. 6, pp. 3947–3986, 2020. [80] Y. Tian and Y. Zhang, “A comprehensive survey on regularization strategies in machine learning,” Inf. Fusion , vol. 80, pp. 146–166, 2022. [81] J. Huang and C. X. Ling, “Using AUC and accuracy in evaluating learning algorithms,” IEEE Trans. Knowl. Data Eng. , vol. 17, no. 3, pp. 299–310, 2005. [82] A. V. Balakrishnan and R. R. Mazumdar, “On powers of gaussian white noise,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory , vol. 57, no. 11, pp. 7629–7634, 2011. [83] J. Kos, I. Fischer, and D. Song, “Adversarial examples for generative models,” in 2018 ieee security and privacy workshops (spw) . IEEE, 2018, pp. 36–42. [84] A. Creswell, T. White, V. Dumoulin, K. Arulkumaran, B. Sengupta, and A. A. Bharath, “Generative adversarial networks: An overview,” IEEE Signal Process. Mag. , vol. 35, no. 1, pp. 53–65, 2018. [85] X. Yuan, P. He, Q. Zhu, and X. Li, “Adversarial examples: Attacks and defenses for deep learning,” IEEE Trans. Neural Netw. Learn. Syst. ,vol. 30, no. 9, pp. 2805–2824, 2019.