Title: Technical Report on the CVPR 2026@AdvML Workshop Challenge

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2607.11560v1

Published Time: Tue, 14 Jul 2026 02:20:46 GMT

Number of Pages: 21

Markdown Content:
# Technical Report on the CVPR 2026@AdvML Workshop Challenge 

## Tianyuan Zhang 1,†, Zonglei Jing 1,†, Jiangfan Liu 1,†, Ligong Zhang 2,‡, Ke Ma 2,‡, Chengzhi Sun 2,‡

## Xiaohai Xu 2,‡, Zhirui Zhang 2,‡, Qianqian Xu 3,‡, Qingming Huang 2,‡, Hanyu Fang 4,‡, Junhua Liu 5,6,‡

## Zheng Wang 4,‡, Xiaoliang Liu 7,‡, Yuanbo Li 8,‡, Shuai Gui 8,‡, Bin Wang 8,‡, Menghe Zheng 8,‡, Jing Nie 8,‡

## Hanyang Meng 8,‡, Zeyang Zhang 8,‡, Xiang Zhang 8,‡, Yongxuan Zhu 9,‡, Rui Ding 10 ,‡, Hainan Li 11 ,†

## Yongkang Zhang 1,†, Zhilei Zhu 11 ,†, Xianglong Kong 11 ,†, Jin Hu 1,12 ,†, Zonghao Ying 1,†, Yisong Xiao 1,†

## Lei Chen 13 ,† Haotong Qin 14 ,†, Jiakai Wang 12 ,†, Aishan Liu 1,†, Ruikai Li 1,†, Julia Karbing 15 ,†, Yinpeng Dong 13 ,†

## Zhenfei Yin 15 ,†, Shao Jing 16 ,†, Xia Hu 16 ,†, Jingyi Xu 1,†, Juntao Dai 17 ,†, Xinyun Chen 18 ,†, Vishal M. Patel 19 ,†

## Xianglong Liu 1,12 ,†, Dawn Song 20 ,†, Alan Yuille 19 ,†, Philip H. S. Torr 15 ,†, Dacheng Tao 21 ,†                                        

> 1Beihang University 2University of Chinese Academy of Sciences 3Institute of Computing Technology, Chinese Academy of Sciences 4Tongji University
> 5iFLYTEK Co., Ltd. 6Anhui Laboratory for Safe Artificial Intelligence in the Yangtze River Delta 7Wenzhou Business College 8Jiangnan University
> 9Guangzhou City University of Technology 10 Inceptio Technology 11 Institute of Dataspace 12 Zhongguancun Laboratory 13 Tsinghua University
> 14 ETH Z¨ urich 15 University of Oxford 16 Shanghai AI Laboratory 17 BAAI 18 Meta 19 Johns Hopkins University
> 20 University of California, Berkeley 21 Nanyang Technological University
> †Organizer ‡Challenger

https://cvpr26-advml.github.io/ 

## Abstract 

Vision-language agents (VLAs) are increasingly used to in-terpret complex driving scenes and support safety-critical reasoning. This report presents the CVPR 2026@AdvML Workshop Challenge on adversarial multimodal attacks against autonomous-driving VLAs. Built on DriveLM-style multi-view visual question answering, the challenge repre-sents each scene with six synchronized camera images and a structured collection of driving-related question-answer pairs. Participants generate adversarial images and suffix-only textual perturbations that induce model responses to deviate from reference answers while preserving image fi-delity and limiting textual cost. The competition comprises two phases, with Phase II adding a hidden black-box model to assess transferability. We describe the task design, sub-mission rules, evaluation protocol, and leaderboard results, and then examine five leading submissions for which tech-nical reports were available. Across these reports, sev-eral recurring patterns emerge: image-side attacks are fa-vored by the suffix penalty; scene-level, multi-view opti-mization is more effective than treating views in isolation; QA types and graph structure provide useful priors for allo-cating attack budget; feature-space objectives can improve black-box transfer; and typographic content embedded in camera images exposes a persistent vulnerability in driv-ing VLAs. These findings provide a practical reference for future robustness evaluation and defense design in multi-modal autonomous-driving systems. 

## 1. Introduction 

Recent multimodal foundation models and vision-language agents have demonstrated strong capabilities in perceiving traffic scenes, reasoning about objects and their relations, and answering decision-oriented driving questions [1, 7, 11, 14, 20]. In autonomous driving, however, these capabil-ities also create a safety-critical attack surface. A model that misinterprets a traffic light, overlooks a nearby pedes-trian, or produces an unsafe response to a planning ques-tion may compromise downstream decision making. The CVPR 2026 @ AdvML Workshop Challenge investigates this risk through adversarial multimodal attacks against driving VLAs, building on the broader literature on adver-sarial examples and robustness evaluation [2, 4, 10, 18]. The challenge focuses on DriveLM-style visual ques-tion answering [22], in which each scene is represented by six synchronized camera views and a structured set of driving-related QA pairs. Compared with conventional image-classification attacks, this setting presents several ad-ditional difficulties. First, the model can aggregate evidence across cameras, so perturbing a single local region may arXiv:2607.11560v1 [cs.CV] 13 Jul 2026 leave sufficient information elsewhere in the scene. Sec-ond, answers are generated through language-conditioned reasoning rather than selected from fixed class logits. Third, valid submissions must satisfy practical constraints: image changes should remain limited, textual edits are restricted to appended suffixes, and the final images are saved and evaluated after JPEG encoding. Finally, Phase II introduces a hidden black-box model, making transferability a cen-tral objective, as emphasized by recent studies of vision-language attacks and safety [19, 26, 27, 30, 31]. This report documents the challenge design and distills the principal technical lessons from five leading submis-sions with available reports. Rather than treating these methods as isolated solutions, we use them to identify broader trends in VLA robustness: visual-first attacks are highly competitive; suffix attacks require careful QA-type-specific design to offset their length penalty; feature-space objectives can improve black-box transfer; and text ren-dered directly into driving images remains an effective cross-modal shortcut. 

## 2. Competition Overview 

2.1. Theme and Task 

The challenge, titled Adversarial Multimodal Attacks against Vision-Language Agents , investigated the adversar-ial robustness of vision-language agents (VLAs) in safety-critical autonomous-driving scenarios based on DriveLM. Given a driving scene containing six camera-view images and a set of driving-related question-answer pairs, partic-ipants constructed joint multimodal adversarial inputs by perturbing the images and appending textual suffixes to the original questions. The objective was to induce incorrect, unsafe, or misleading model responses while preserving the original visual content and minimizing textual modifica-tions. The challenge examined vulnerabilities in multi-view perception, visual grounding, traffic understanding, motion reasoning, collision-risk assessment, ego-vehicle behavior, and language-conditioned planning. It also provided practi-cal evidence for developing more robust multimodal agents, including cross-modal consistency verification, adversarial input filtering, robust visual reasoning, and transfer-aware evaluation. 

2.2. Participation and Schedule 

The competition attracted 54 teams. Participants competed individually or in teams of up to five members, and team composition was fixed after the first successful submission. Based on Phase I performance and eligibility review, 21 teams entered Phase II. Each team was allowed at most two submissions per day during both phases. In Phase I, con-secutive submissions required an approximately 40-minute          

> Table 1. Official timeline of the CVPR 2026 AdvML Workshop Challenge.
> Date Event
> March 19, 2026 Competition started March 24, 2026 Phase I data were released March 27, 2026 Phase I started April 20, 2026 Phase I ended April 27, 2026 Phase II data were released and Phase II started May 16, 2026 Phase II ended May 30, 2026 Results were released and presenters were selected June 2026 Workshop presentations were held

waiting period, and the public leaderboard was updated hourly. Participants were also required to submit a tech-nical report containing a detailed method description and ablation studies to be included in the final ranking. The competition followed the delayed schedule pub-lished on the official workshop website, as summarized in Table 1. 

2.3. Dataset and Submission Format 

Each phase contained 200 autonomous-driving scenes. Ev-ery scene comprised six camera-view images, together with a QA.json file containing driving-related questions and their corresponding ground-truth answers. For scene i, let Xi = {xi,c }6 

> c=1

denote the six camera images and Qi = {(qi,j , a i,j )}Ni 

> j=1

denote its Ni question-answer pairs. Participants generated adversarial images 

xadv  

> i,c

and adversarial questions 

qadv  

> i,j

= qi,j ∥si,j , (1) where si,j was an appended suffix and ∥ denotes string con-catenation. The complete original question had to remain unchanged as the prefix of the submitted question: 

prefix  qadv  

> i,j

, |qi,j | = qi,j . (2) Any modification to the original prefix resulted in a score of zero for the corresponding question. Submissions preserved the original scene ordering, di-rectory structure, and file names. Adversarial questions were stored in the question field of QA.json , while the 

id field remained unchanged and the answer field was not required. Images were submitted in JPG format, text files used GBK or UTF-8 encoding, and the compressed sub-mission file could not exceed 50 MB. 

2.4. Competition Stages 

Phase I: Known-model attack. Phase I used 200 driv-ing scenes and evaluated each submission against DriveLM-Agent, the VLM-based baseline introduced in DriveLM for graph-structured visual question answering and end-to-end driving [22]. Participants jointly modified the six camera-view images and the questions associated with each scene. The objective was to cause the generated responses to devi-ate substantially from the ground-truth answers while pre-serving high image similarity and using short suffixes. 

Phase II: Black-box transfer attack. Phase II intro-duced 200 new driving scenes with the same input structure and suffix-only constraint. Each submission was evaluated on both DriveLM-Agent [22] and Dolphins [17], a driving-specific multimodal language model. During the competi-tion, DriveLM-Agent remained the known model, whereas Dolphins was hidden from participants and served as the black-box evaluation model. This setting evaluated whether attacks developed against the known model could transfer to a different driving-oriented VLM. Let FinalScore DriveLM and FinalScore Dolphins denote the model-specific scores obtained on DriveLM-Agent and Dolphins, respectively. The Phase II score was computed as 

PhaseIIScore = 12



FinalScore DriveLM + FinalScore Dolphins 

.

(3) The two-model evaluation rewarded attacks that maintained their effectiveness across model architectures. Conse-quently, attacks overfitted to DriveLM-Agent could achieve strong known-model performance but receive a lower final score if they transferred poorly to Dolphins. 

2.5. Evaluation Protocol 

The official evaluation jointly considered attack effective-ness, image preservation, and textual perturbation cost. A large language model was used to evaluate each response generated from an adversarial image-question pair. For scene i, the scene-level score was 

SceneScore i = 1

NiNiX

> j=1

(100 − GPTScore i,j ) ¯Si 0.99 xi,j ,

(4) where GPTScore i,j denotes the LLM-based correctness score of the response to the j-th question. A lower value indicated a larger deviation from the ground-truth answer and therefore a stronger attack. The image-preservation term was computed by averag-ing the normalized cosine similarity over the six camera views: 

¯Si = 16

> 6

X

> c=1

Si,c , (5) where Si,c ∈ [0 , 1] denotes the similarity between the orig-inal and adversarial representations of camera view c. The variable xi,j denotes the character length of the suffix ap-pended to the j-th question, and the factor 0.99 xi,j penal-ized unnecessarily long suffixes. The model-specific final score was obtained by averag-ing over all M evaluation scenes: 

FinalScore = 1

M

> M

X

> i=1

SceneScore i. (6) Accordingly, a high-scoring attack had to simultaneously induce substantial answer deviation, preserve the semantic content of all six camera views, and avoid excessive textual modifications. Because the evaluation involved stochas-tic foundation models, minor score variations could occur when identical submissions were evaluated repeatedly. 

## 3. Competition Results 

In Phase I, participants explored a wide range of adversar-ial multimodal attacks against autonomous-driving VLAs under the known-model setting. Table 2 reports the top 20 entries on the Phase I leaderboard, with scores ranging from 38.38 to 56.81. team hymeng ranked first with 56.81, followed closely by team Xuzhenyu and JNU AdvML with 56.39 and 56.13, respectively. The margin between the first-and third-ranked teams was only 0.68 points, indicating in-tense competition at the top of the leaderboard. In contrast, the gap between first and twentieth place reached 18.43 points, reflecting substantial variation in attack effective-ness under the suffix-only constraint and multi-view image-preservation objective. The top six teams all scored above 50, whereas the lower half of the displayed leaderboard was concentrated between 38.38 and 45.41. This distribu-tion suggests that consistently disrupting model responses across scenes was a key differentiator in the known-model phase. Under the official qualification procedure, 21 teams advanced to Phase II. Phase II introduced a more stringent black-box transfer setting. Table 3 presents the top 20 entries on the orig-inal Phase II leaderboard together with their final ranks after the required technical-report review. Two teams, team Xuzhenyu and team jielongzhao, originally ranked third and seventh, respectively, but did not submit the re-quired technical reports by the deadline. Their leaderboard scores were therefore invalidated, and both teams were ex-cluded from the official final ranking. After eligibility screening, MR-CAS and team tong re-tained the top two positions with scores of 76.63 and 75.93, respectively, while WZBC AbeLiuXL and JNU AdvML moved to third and fourth place. team hymeng completed the top five with 60.63. Only 0.70 points separated the two leading teams, whereas an 8.63-point gap emerged between JNU AdvML in fourth place and team hymeng in fifth. The raw top-20 score range expanded to 40.00 points, from 36.63 to 76.63, showing that Phase II produced a substan-tially more dispersed performance distribution than Phase I. This pattern is consistent with the additional difficulty in-troduced by hidden-model transfer and submission-level ro-Table 2. Top 20 results on the Phase I leaderboard. 

Rank Team Name Score 

1 team hymeng 56.81 2 team Xuzhenyu 56.39 3 JNU AdvML 56.13 4 WZBC AbeLiuXL 53.92 5 MR-CAS 52.02 6 team jielongzhao 50.16 7 AISEC xjtu 49.81 8 suibianwanwan 46.52 9 我不会CV 45.61 10 KDSec-IIE 45.53 11 ydc 45.41 12 team YZH 0.0 44.34 13 TIME 43.47 14 Diamond AI 43.27 15 I am faker 42.87 16 team liuls 42.83 17 team zzy temp 42.72 18 team tong 40.87 19 ICT AIST 39.30 20 whoami 38.38 

Table 3. Top 20 entries on the original Phase II leaderboard and their final status after technical-report review.                                                                  

> Raw Final Team Name Score Rank Rank
> 11MR-CAS 76.63 22team tong 75.93 3–team Xuzhenyu ∗72.32 43WZBC AbeLiuXL 71.19 54JNU AdvML 69.26 65team hymeng 60.63 7–team jielongzhao ∗56.07 86Diamond AI 54.58 97team YZH 0.0 54.23 10 8suibianwanwan 52.47 11 9team liuls 48.39 12 10 team zzy temp 47.94 13 11 TIME 47.77 14 12 KDSec-IIE 44.92 15 13 I am faker 38.67 16 14 team Navsight 38.20 17 15 ICT AIST 38.12 18 16 team vibe 37.01 19 17 我不会CV 36.99 20 18 team tianyuan 36.63
> ∗The team did not submit the required technical report by the deadline; its leader-board score was invalidated and excluded from the official final ranking.

bustness, although leaderboard scores alone cannot isolate the contribution of each factor. The case studies in the next section examine the five highest-ranked valid teams that submitted the required tech-nical reports: MR-CAS, team tong, WZBC AbeLiuXL, JNU AdvML, and team hymeng. 

3.1. Phase Transition Analysis 

The transition from Phase I to Phase II provides insight into the difference between known-model attack effectiveness and performance under an additional hidden evaluator. Fig-ure 1 shows substantially different score profiles across the two phases. Phase I contained a compact leading group: the top five teams scored between 52.02 and 56.81, and less than one point separated the top three. By contrast, Phase II was more polarized: the best score increased to 76.63, the overall spread widened considerably, and a pro-nounced gap emerged within the leading valid group. The final phase therefore did more than uniformly rescale the Phase I leaderboard; it substantially changed the relative or-dering of attack strategies. Table 4 summarizes the teams appearing in both top-20 leaderboards. The table reports both the original Phase II leaderboard rank and the final rank after technical-report review. MR-CAS advanced from fifth place in Phase I to first place in the final ranking, a result consistent with the transfer-oriented design of its suffix-free visual distractors. team tong achieved the largest rank gain among the ana-lyzed teams, rising from eighteenth to second after adopting a transfer-oriented image-attack pipeline and type-selective suffixes. WZBC AbeLiuXL moved from fourth to third, while JNU AdvML moved from third to fourth despite a substantial score increase. team hymeng ranked first in Phase I but placed fifth after the final eligibility screening. The original third- and seventh-ranked Phase II entries, team Xuzhenyu and team jielongzhao, are retained in Ta-ble 4 only to document the raw leaderboard transition. Be-cause they did not submit the required technical reports by the deadline, no final rank or rank gain is assigned to ei-ther team. Overall, these shifts demonstrate that strong known-model performance did not guarantee the same rel-ative standing under black-box transfer and final eligibility requirements. 

## 4. Analysis of Submissions 

4.1. Overview of Attack Strategies 

The submitted reports show that effective attacks against driving VLAs require more than a single generic perturba-tion. The leading solutions exploit the structure of the task: six synchronized views, heterogeneous QA types, graph-like dependencies among driving concepts, and a composite metric that penalizes unnecessary input changes. A common theme is the importance of the image chan-nel. Because textual changes are restricted to suffixes and penalized by length, several teams leave the questions un-changed and allocate most of their adversarial budget to the images. Their image-side attacks nevertheless differ substantially. MR-CAS combines local blur with global character distractors, drawing on visual-text shortcuts ob-1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20   

> Leaderboard rank
> 40
> 50
> 60
> 70
> 80
> Official score  Phase II top-5 break
> Phase I Phase II Top-5 band

Figure 1. Score distributions of the top 20 entries on the Phase I and original Phase II leaderboards. Phase II exhibits a wider spread and a pronounced separation among the leading valid teams. The two Phase II entries later invalidated for missing technical reports are retained in the visualization to preserve the original leaderboard distribution. Table 4. Phase transition for teams appearing in both top-10 leaderboards. The Phase II raw rank denotes the original leaderboard position, whereas the final rank reflects the ranking after technical-report review. Positive rank gain indicates an improvement from Phase I to the final valid ranking. 

Team Phase I rank Phase I score Phase II raw rank Final rank Phase II score Rank gain / score change 

MR-CAS 5 52.02 1 1 76.63 +4 / +24.61 team tong 18 40.87 2 2 75.93 +16 / +35.06 team Xuzhenyu ∗ 2 56.39 3 – 72.32 N/A / +15.93 WZBC AbeLiuXL 4 53.92 4 3 71.19 +1 / +17.27 JNU AdvML 3 56.13 5 4 69.26 -1 / +13.13 team hymeng 1 56.81 6 5 60.63 -4 / +3.82 team jielongzhao ∗ 6 50.16 7 – 56.07 N/A / +5.91 Diamond AI 14 43.27 8 6 54.58 +8 / +11.31 team YZH 0.0 12 44.34 9 7 54.23 +5 / +9.89 suibianwanwan 8 46.52 10 8 52.47 0 / +5.95  

> ∗The team did not submit the required technical report by the deadline and was therefore excluded from the official final ranking.

served in multimodal models [8, 9]. WZBC AbeLiuXL uses gradient-based feature and QA losses with spatially adaptive budgets. JNU AdvML attacks internal multimodal features rather than final answers. team hymeng renders short semantic phrases across all camera views. Even team tong, which makes the greatest use of text suffixes, treats them as QA-type-selective complements to a transfer-oriented image PGD pipeline. A second theme is transferability. Because Phase II introduces a hidden model, attacks must avoid ex-cessive specialization to a single surrogate. Teams ad-dress this challenge through input diversity, momentum, translation-invariant gradients, expectation over transfor-mations, JPEG-aware optimization, semantic-subspace dis-tances, and model-agnostic typographic cues [3, 5, 6, 23, 24]. These designs support evaluating VLA robustness on both known and hidden models. A third theme is task awareness. The strongest reports analyze QA subtypes, driving graph dependencies, safety-critical nodes, camera coverage, or object-level cues. This is important because the same perturbation may not affect a binary collision question, an open-ended important-object question, and an ego-action planning question equally. 

4.2. Case Study: Team MR-CAS 

4.2.1. Introduction and Competition Analysis 

The CVPR 2026@AdvML Workshop Challenge inves-tigates the black-box adversarial robustness of vision-language agents in autonomous driving scenarios, where vi-sual question answering has become an important paradigm for evaluating driving scene understandig. Each scene con-tains six synchronized camera-view images and multiple driving-related question-answer pairs. Participants are al-lowed to modify the visual inputs and optionally append textual suffixes to the original questions, with the objec-tive of making the target model’s responses deviate from Table 5. Technical-route overview of the five case-study teams. The top submissions share the same competition objective but exploit different attack surfaces: visual distractors, joint image-text optimization, QA graph structure, internal semantic pathways, and typographic rendering.                                 

> Team Primary attack surface Core mechanism Transfer design
> MR-CAS Six-view images Target-aware blur plus global char-acter distractors Suffix-free rendering and surrogate-guided string search team tong Images plus short suffixes NI/MI/DI/TI PGD with type-selective suffixes Conflict-aware suffix suppres-sion and best-delta tracking WZBC AbeLiuXL Images guided by QA graph Graph node selection, adaptive bud-get, and subtype weighting RST-EOT, MIM, all-view, and random-view feature losses JNU AdvML Internal multimodal features Visual-query, LLM-hidden, and CLIP branches with Grassmann distance Input diversity and JPEG-BPDA over semantic sub-spaces team hymeng Visible visual text QA-derived typographic risk phrases rendered on all views Model-agnostic deterministic rendering and multi-view cov-erage

the reference answers. The evaluation metric jointly consid-ers attack effectiveness, image similarity, and the length of the appended suffix. Therefore, a successful solution must reduce answer consistency while introducing only limited modifications to the original inputs. The challenge presents several difficulties. First, the offi-cial target models are accessed only through black-box sub-mission, without model parameters, gradients, or intermedi-ate representations. Moreover, the official evaluator returns only the final score, making it difficult to reproduce the eval-uation process and compare attack candidates locally. Sec-ond, the six camera views provide complementary informa-tion about the same driving scene. The target model may in-tegrate evidence across different views, so perturbing a sin-gle image or a small isolated region may have only a limited effect. Finally, attack strength must be balanced against per-turbation cost: stronger image modifications may decrease visual similarity, while textual suffixes are directly penal-ized according to their length. Based on this analysis, we adopt a visual-first, model-agnostic attack strategy and keep the original questions un-changed. Our solution focuses on transferable visual per-turbations that jointly disrupt answer-critical local evidence and multi-view scene-level reasoning. To support efficient development under the black-box setting, we additionally construct a local surrogate evaluation environment for com-paring and optimizing candidate attacks before official sub-mission. 

4.2.2. Methodology 

Our method, named Target-Aware Visual Distractor At-tack (TVDA), is a visual-first black-box attack framework. Instead of using target-model gradients or modifying the questions with long suffixes, TVDA keeps the original ques-tions unchanged and perturbs only the six camera-view im-ages. The overall framework consists of three components: a local surrogate evaluation environment, a target-aware lo-cal perturbation module, and a scene-level visual distractor optimization module. 

Local surrogate evaluation. Since the official target models are unavailable during local development, directly evaluating candidate attacks is difficult. To enable efficient iteration, we construct a local surrogate evaluation environ-ment. We first run a substitute vision-language agent on the original images and questions, and use its clean responses as pseudo-reference answers. For each adversarial candi-date, the same substitute model is evaluated on the per-turbed images. We then compare the adversarial responses with the pseudo-reference answers using a locally deployed language-model judge to obtain a GPTScore-like semantic consistency score. In parallel, we compute the cosine simi-larity between the original and adversarial image represen-tations to estimate the visual preservation term. This local environment does not exactly reproduce the official evalua-tion, but it provides a practical feedback signal for compar-ing different perturbation designs before online submission. 

LLM-assisted key-object localization. Driving-related questions often rely on specific visual evidence, such as vehicles, pedestrians, traffic lights, traffic signs, lane mark-ings, or their spatial relationships. To identify these answer-critical regions without access to the target model, we use a large language model to analyze each question-answer pair. The language model predicts coarse localization hints, in-cluding the relevant object category, the possible camera view, and the approximate spatial position. These hints are not used as precise bounding boxes; instead, they guide the selection of local regions that are likely to influence the answer. This design makes the attack target-aware while avoiding reliance on accurate object detectors or model-specific gradients. Visual perturbation generation. The final perturbation combines target-aware local blur and global structured char-acter distractors. For the local component, we apply blur to the coarse regions identified by the LLM-assisted localiza-tion module. This weakens answer-critical visual evidence while keeping most of the image unchanged, which helps preserve high image similarity. However, local blur alone may be insufficient because the model can aggregate infor-mation across the six camera views. Therefore, we further add global structured distractors to all views in the scene. Figure 2 shows an example of the visual perturbation pro-cess, where the answer-critical region is first blurred and structured character distractors are then added to the image. The global distractors are meaningless strings composed of letters, digits, and symbols. They are rendered at fixed relative positions on each camera-view image with a consis-tent visual style. These text-like patterns introduce salient visual cues and may interfere with visual-text alignment and multi-view scene reasoning. By combining local blur with global distractors, TVDA simultaneously disrupts fine-grained object perception and scene-level reasoning, which improves transferability under the black-box setting. 

Rendering parameter search and string optimization. 

After fixing the overall perturbation form, we optimize the rendering configuration of the character distractors. We conduct a small-scale grid search over several factors, in-cluding the number of text lines, font size, character length, color, opacity, and outline width. The candidate config-urations are evaluated in the local surrogate environment, and the final base configuration uses three text lines, font size 29, character length 9, yellow text filling, and a thin black outline. For dark scenes, where bright distractors are more likely to reduce image similarity, we further reduce the text opacity when necessary to better preserve the simi-larity score. Figure 3 illustrates this opacity adjustment for dark scenes. Finally, we optimize the character strings using a genetic algorithm while keeping the rendering style fixed. The pop-ulation size is set to 32, the number of generations is 12, the top 4 candidates are preserved as elites, and the mutation rate is 0.10. Since different candidates share the same ren-dering layout, their image similarity scores are nearly un-changed. Therefore, this stage mainly minimizes the local GPTScore by searching for more effective character com-positions, without increasing the perturbation area or text length. 

4.2.3. Experimental Results 

Our final submission ranked first among 85 participating teams in the CVPR 2026@AdvML Workshop Challenge. Since the official target models and evaluation process are not fully accessible during local development, we do not 

> Figure 2. Illustration of the proposed visual perturbation process. The original camera view is first modified by target-aware local blur, and then structured character distractors are added to form the final adversarial image.
> Figure 3. Opacity adjustment for dark scenes. Reducing the opac-ity of character distractors helps preserve image similarity when the distractors are overly salient in low-light images.

use the local evaluation score as an estimate of the official leaderboard score. Instead, the local surrogate environment is used for relative comparison among different attack vari-ants. To analyze the effectiveness of our design, we conduct local ablation studies using the surrogate evaluation envi-ronment described above. For each setting, we generate ad-versarial images, run the surrogate vision-language agent, compute a GPTScore-like semantic consistency score, and measure the image similarity between the original and ad-versarial images. Lower GPTScore indicates stronger at-tack effectiveness, while higher similarity indicates better visual preservation. The reported local score is only used to compare different variants under the same surrogate setting. Table 6 summarizes the main ablation results. For the component ablation, blur-only achieves the highest image similarity, but its attack effect is limited. The structured character distractor substantially reduces GPTScore, show-ing that global visual distraction is more effective than lo-cal degradation alone. Combining local blur with global distractors obtains the lowest GPTScore and the best local score, demonstrating that the two components are comple-mentary. We further compare different character-string designs. Meaningful words are less effective than random strings, suggesting that the attack effect does not mainly come from the literal semantics of the rendered text. After genetic opti-mization, the character strings further reduce GPTScore and achieve the best local score, while the image similarity re-mains almost unchanged. This result indicates that optimiz-ing the distractor content can improve attack strength with-Table 6. Local ablation results of TVDA. The local score is used only for relative comparison under the surrogate setting.                         

> Setting GPTScore ↓Similarity ↑Local Score ↑
> Component ablation
> Blur only 74.5484 0.9984 25.4112 Distractor only 64.7201 0.9297 32.7997 Blur + distractor 54.3972 0.9246 42.1650
> Character-string design
> Meaningful words 64.4021 0.9239 32.8882 Random strings 58.2774 0.9263 38.6479 Optimized strings 54.3972 0.9246 42.1650

out increasing the perturbation area or changing the render-ing configuration. 

4.2.4. Conclusion 

In this case study, we present TVDA, a target-aware visual distractor attack for black-box vision-language agents in au-tonomous driving scenarios. Our method keeps the original questions unchanged and perturbs only the visual inputs, thereby avoiding the length penalty introduced by textual suffixes. Under the black-box setting, we construct a local surrogate evaluation environment to guide attack develop-ment, and combine LLM-assisted key-object localization, target-aware local blur, structured character distractors, and genetic string optimization. The local ablation results show that local blur and global distractors are complementary: local blur weakens answer-critical visual evidence, while structured distractors further interfere with scene-level multi-view reasoning. The com-parison of different character-string designs also indicates that optimized meaningless strings are more effective than meaningful words, suggesting that the attack mainly relies on visual distraction rather than textual semantics. Over-all, our results highlight that vision-language agents can be sensitive to small but structured visual modifications, and that perturbation-efficient black-box attacks remain an im-portant challenge for robust autonomous driving perception and reasoning. 

4.3. Case Study: Team tong 

4.3.1. Introduction and Competition Analysis 

The DriveLM Challenge targets LLaMA-Adapter V2 (BIAS-7B) [7], a vision-language model (VLM) fine-tuned on the DriveLM dataset [22] for autonomous driving scene understanding. Given six synchronised camera images and a natural-language question, the model generates a free-text answer evaluated by a GPT-4 judge. The test set comprises 200 nuScenes driving scenes with approximately 1,600 QA pairs spanning eight semantic categories. Participants are required to jointly perturb both image and text inputs to maximally degrade model output quality. In Phase II, scores are averaged with those of an undisclosed black-box model, making black-box transferability a critical objective along-side white-box attack effectiveness [25, 26]. 

Scoring function. The composite score simultaneously penalises attack ineffectiveness, perturbation visibility, and suffix length: 

S =  1 − SGPT 

 × Simg × Slen , (7) where SGPT ∈ [0 , 1] is the GPT-judge quality score (lower is better for the attacker), Simg is the mean cosine similarity between original and adversarial image features (higher im-plies more imperceptible perturbation), and Slen applies an exponential penalty to suffixes of character length L.

Key challenges. (i) Three-way trade-off. Strong image perturbations and informative text suffixes are penalised by 

Simg and Slen , respectively. JPEG quality-95 output fur-ther imposes a practical ceiling at ε = 32 /255 ; pertur-bations above this threshold are attenuated during com-pression without improving attack quality. (ii) Multi-modal channel conflict. When image PGD and a text suffix independently steer the model toward different er-roneous tokens, their gradients cancel at every step, wast-ing the adversarial budget of both channels [21, 25, 27]. 

(iii) Heterogeneous question semantics. We define eight categories by keyword-matching the DriveLM QA pairs: Q D ETECT , Q M OTION , Q C OLLISION , Q A CTION EGO ,Q S AFE , Q B EHAVE , Q P RIORITY , and Q C LASS . Cat-egories differ substantially in answer length, output diver-sity, and model confidence, rendering a uniform attack sub-optimal. (iv) Proxy–evaluator divergence. RougeL as-signs near-perfect scores to short wrong answers; the GPT-4 judge penalises them only moderately [19], so proxy gains may not transfer to the leaderboard. 

4.3.2. Methodology Phase 1 baseline. The Phase 1 attack applies MI-PGD [5] with ε = 16 /255 , α = 2 /255 , and 200 steps to all six cam-era images. Momentum μ = 1 .0 smooths update directions, with each perturbation projected back onto the ℓ∞ ball. For the text component, GCG [33] (top-k = 256 , 200 steps) op-timises a discrete token suffix on a subset of question types to direct next-token distributions toward erroneous outputs. This baseline achieved a leaderboard score of 40.87. 

Phase 2 v5 attack framework. The v5 method jointly optimises image perturbations and type-specific text suf-fixes through a single shared forward pass. The image at-tack composes four gradient transformation techniques on PGD [10] to improve black-box transferability: • NI [13]: evaluates the gradient at the Nesterov look-ahead point, reducing oscillation; • MI [5]: accumulates momentum to smooth update direc-tions and improve transfer to unseen model variants; • DI [24]: applies random resizing (scale ∈ [0 .8, 1.0] ) and zero-padding to prevent resolution overfitting; • TI [6]: convolves the gradient with a 5×5 Gaussian kernel for spatially smoother, more transferable perturbations. An Auto-PGD best-delta tracker [4] retains the perturbation with the highest cumulative loss across all 400 steps, guard-ing against quality degradation caused by oscillation in the final iterate. 

Loss function. The objective combines untargeted and targeted cross-entropy with per-type adaptive weighting: 

L = X

> t

wt

h

L(t)un + λ L(t)tgt 

i

, (8) where Lun pushes the model away from correct tokens and 

Ltgt pulls it toward medium-length (8–13 token) wrong-answer targets — e.g. “No objects are present. The scene is completely clear.” for Q D ETECT . Because sign-PGD fixes the per-step update magnitude at α, the weights wt control gradient direction rather than magnitude, reallocating the fixed step budget toward types with greater remaining im-provement margin [28]. 

Type-selective text suffix design. Each question type re-ceives a type-specific suffix appended at both training and inference time. The v5 configuration is given in Table 7.                            

> Table 7. Type-selective text suffix configuration for v5.
> Type Suffix Adversarial Intent Chars
> Q ActionEgo “None.” Null ego-action response 5Q Collision “No.” Deny all collision risk 3Q Detect “ None.” Deny object presence 6Q Priority “ None.” Deny priority objects 6Q Class “ No” Negation bias on classification 3Q Behave “ No” Negation bias on behaviour 3Q Safe “ Go.” Assert unconditional safety 4Q Motion (empty) Cross-modal conflict resolved 0

4.3.3. Core Technical Innovations Innovation 1: Token-level cross-modal channel compat-ibility and selective suffix suppression. Joint VLM ad-versarial attacks [21, 25, 27] require the image PGD chan-nel and the text suffix channel to target compatible vocab-ulary entries in order to cooperate rather than cancel. We identify a concrete instance of this conflict in Q M OTION :the suffix “Stop.” biases decoding toward the LLaMA to-ken Stop , while the image gradient target “Stationary. The object has completely stopped. . . ” places its primary cross-entropy loss on the token Stat — two distinct vocabulary entries. This mismatch causes token-level competition at every gradient step, wasting the adversarial budget of both channels simultaneously. We resolve the conflict asymmetrically by setting the Q M OTION text suffix to empty while retaining the richer 12-token image target. Aligning the suffix to the image tar-get (e.g. “Stat”) is not viable: in sign-PGD the per-step up-date depends solely on gradient direction, and Q M OTION 

already carries the maximum weight of 2.5×, so the image channel’s directional vote is dominant — an aligned text channel provides zero incremental directional gain while in-curring an additional Slen penalty. Table 9 (experiment e4) confirms this empirically. Asymmetric suppression simultaneously eliminates the token-level conflict, removes the length penalty, and pre-serves the richer adversarial signal in the dominant chan-nel. The result is a 62% reduction in Q M OTION GPT score (9.5 → 3.6), a collateral improvement in Q A CTION EGO as freed gradient budget flows to the next-highest-weight type, and an overall proxy gain of +2 .35 points. 

Innovation 2: Difficulty-stratified gradient direction budget allocation. In sign-PGD, per-type weights redi-rect gradient direction rather than amplify magnitude — re-framing weight selection from a loss-scaling problem into a directional budget allocation problem [28]. We stratify question types by intrinsic attack difficulty: Q D ETECT 

and Q M OTION receive weight 2.5× due to structurally di-verse free-form outputs; Q C OLLISION and Q C LASS re-ceive 1.5× owing to near-binary answer patterns; remaining types receive 0.8×–2.0×. Weights above 2.5× empirically induce a proxy-to-leaderboard sign reversal [19, 32] — a reliable indicator of white-box over-specialisation that de-grades black-box transfer. The v5 difficulty-stratified con-figuration yields a net gain of +4 .68 leaderboard points over the v4 uniform 1.5× baseline (71.25 → 75.93). 

4.3.4. Experimental Results Progressive method evolution. Table 8 traces the leader-board score across five successive method versions. The largest single-step gain occurs at v1 → v2 ( +13 .77 points), where doubling ε, introducing NI+MI+DI+TI, and extend-ing the step count act synergistically. 

Ablation: cross-modal conflict resolution. Four con-trolled experiments verify the token-level competition hy-pothesis (Table 9). Experiment e1 achieves the best re-sult ( +2 .35 proxy), with the Q M OTION GPT score falling 62%. The modest gain of e2 ( +0 .50 ) versus e1 con-firms that conflict-resolution benefit scales with the type’s weight. The 0.88 -point gap between e3 and e1 quantifies the retained adversarial value of non-conflicting suffixes; e4’s shortfall of 0.21 establishes that single-token alignment Table 8. Leaderboard score evolution across successive method versions. 

Version LB Core change over previous 

v1 45.90 MI-PGD, ε = 16 /255 , 100 steps; GCG suffix (3 types) v2 59.67 ε → 32 /255 ; NI+MI+DI+TI; 200 steps v3 68.01 300 steps; suffix extended to 5 question types v4 71.25 400 steps; full 8-type suffix; adaptive weighting v5 75.93 Q Motion conflict resolved; stratified weights (max 2.5×)

weakens the image channel’s adversarial signal. These re-sults collectively confirm asymmetric selective removal as the optimal conflict resolution strategy. 

Table 9. Cross-modal conflict resolution strategy comparison (50 scenes, 100 steps).                                      

> Strategy Modification Proxy Q Mot Q Ego Penalty
> Baseline “Stop.” ( ̸=Stat) 84.23 9.5 7.5 0.9535 e1 (ours) Q Motion →“” 86.58 3.6 3.6 0.9608 e2 Q Safe →“” 84.73 9.5 7.5 0.9535 e3 All 8 suffixes →“” 85.70 4.1 5.2 1.0000 e4 All types: 1-token aligned 86.37 4.8 4.1 0.9535

Ablation: per-type weight calibration. Table 10 com-pares three weight configurations. The aggressive 3.0×

configuration produces a proxy-to-leaderboard sign re-versal (gap = +21 .86 ), indicating severe white-box over-specialisation that catastrophically degrades black-box transfer, empirically establishing 2.5× as the safe weight ceiling. 

Table 10. Per-type weight calibration (Gap = Proxy − LB Score).                           

> Configuration wEgo wDet wMot Proxy LB Gap
> v4 uniform 1.5×1.5 1.5 1.5 65.72 71.25 −5.53
> Aggressive 3.0×3.0 2.0 1.5 84.23 62.37 +21 .86
> v5 stratified (ours) 2.0 2.5 2.5 86.58 75.93 −10 .65

Ablation: image attack architecture. Table 11 re-ports ablation results for four design dimensions. Entity-restricted perturbation causes the largest degradation ( −15 

to −18 points), as the VLM integrates holistic scene fea-tures beyond foreground bounding boxes. Admix+DI re-duces attack quality ( −5.68 points) because the 5% clean-image mixture dilutes the adversarial gradient without adding diversity. Two-phase PGD underperforms contin-uous weighting ( −5.90 points) as the abrupt transition dis-cards accumulated NI/MI momentum. Finally, ε = 32 /255 

is confirmed optimal: larger values are attenuated by JPEG compression and reduce Simg .

Table 11. Image attack architecture ablation results (20 scenes, 100 steps).                              

> Experiment Condition Proxy ∆
> Perturb. region Full image (baseline) 65.72 —Entity bbox, 60% intensity 50.15 −15 .57
> Entity bbox, 100% intensity 47.53 −18 .19
> Scene augment. DI only (baseline) 65.72 —DI + Admix ( α= 0 .05 )60.04 −5.68
> PGD schedule Continuous (baseline) 82.11 —Two-phase: 50 warm-up + 50 76.21 −5.90
> εmagnitude 16/255 60.88 −4.84
> 32/255 (baseline) 65.72 —48/255 60.36 −5.36
> 64/255 59.74 −5.98

Implementation details. Experiments are conducted on NVIDIA RTX 5090 GPUs (32 GB GDDR7, Driver 570.144) under CUDA 11.7, Python 3.8.17, PyTorch 2.0.1+cu117, transformers 4.31.0, bitsandbytes 

0.41.1, peft 0.4.0. Key hyperparameters are summarised in Table 12. The single-GPU v5 reproduction command is: 

CUDA VISIBLE DEVICES=0 python3 phase2/v5/train attack v5.py \

--exp v5 --sfx motion "" --sfx action ego "None." \

--w detect 2.5 --w motion 2.5 --w action ego 2.0 \

--w collision 1.5 --steps 400 --no eval 

Table 12. Key hyperparameters for the Phase 2 v5 attack. 

Parameter Value Parameter Value 

ε 32/255 α 2/255 PGD steps 400 DI resize prob. 0.70 TI kernel 5×5 Gauss MI momentum μ 0.30 JPEG quality 95 Suffix avg. penalty 0.9632 

4.3.5. Conclusion 

We presented a multi-modal adversarial attack framework for the DriveLM Challenge that jointly optimises image per-turbations and type-selective text suffixes against LLaMA-Adapter V2 (BIAS-7B). Our two core innovations — token-level cross-modal conflict resolution via asymmetric suffix suppression, and difficulty-stratified gradient direction bud-get allocation — contribute +7 .92 leaderboard points. Pro-gressive method development from v1 to v5 achieves a cu-mulative improvement of +30 .03 points (45.90 → 75.93), securing 2nd place on the final leaderboard. Future work will explore grey-box transferability mechanisms and richer per-type adversarial target generation. 

4.4. Case Study: Team WZBC AbeLiuXL 

(a) Introduction and Competition Analysis 

This challenge evaluates adversarial robustness in multi-view driving visual question answering, following the graph-based DriveLM formulation [22]. Each scene con-tains six camera views and multiple QA pairs covering perception, prediction, planning, ego-vehicle behavior, and motion reasoning. Compared with standard image-level at-tacks, the perturbation must simultaneously disrupt multi-view visual grounding and decision-oriented reasoning. We analyze the QA data at both category and subtype levels. At the category level, questions are grouped as 

C = {P 1, P 2, P 3, B, M, other }. (9) For a dataset with N scenes, the number and proportion of questions in each category are computed as 

nc =

> N

X

> i=1
> Ki

X

> k=1

1 [cat( qi,k ) = c] , pc = nc

P 

> c′∈C

nc′

.

(10) This distribution reflects the heterogeneous reasoning struc-ture of the challenge. At the subtype level, questions differ substantially in answer form and attack difficulty. For ex-ample, important objects and attention are typ-ically open-ended, whereas sign barrier mainly in-volves binary judgments about localized traffic signs or road barriers. Such safety-critical and highly localized questions often yield confident short answers and are therefore more difficult to perturb. The challenge presents four main difficulties. First, the model aggregates six camera views, requiring attacks on both global multi-view representations and camera-specific cues. Second, graph-based driving QA forms a reasoning chain in which perception errors may propagate to prediction, planning, behavior, and motion reasoning. Third, answer disruption must be balanced against visual fi-delity through spatially adaptive perturbation. Fourth, diffi-cult safety-critical subtypes, particularly sign barrier ,

collision , and safe action , require stronger opti-mization than easier free-form questions. Accordingly, our method combines graph-context-guided node selection, subtype-aware QA weighting, region- and attention-aware perturbation allocation, and ro-bust iterative optimization with EOT and MIM. 

(b) Methodology 

We propose a graph-context-guided untargeted multi-view adversarial attack for driving VQA. The framework contains four main components: graph-context-guided QA node selection, region- and attention-aware perturbation al-location, subtype-aware untargeted QA optimization, and robust optimization with RST-style EOT and MIM. The tar-get model remains frozen, and only the input images are optimized. Let 

X = {xc}6 

> c=1

(11) denote the six camera views, and let 

Q = {(qk, a k)}Kk=1 (12) denote the QA set, where qk and ak are the question and its clean answer. The adversarial input is 

X adv = clip( X + δ, 0, 1) , (13) subject to a spatially adaptive perturbation constraint: 

|δ(u)| ≤ ϵ(u), ϵ(u) ∈ [ϵmin , ϵ max ]. (14) This formulation follows the standard adversarial optimiza-tion paradigm [10, 18]. Rather than assigning manually de-signed target answers, we maximize the cross-entropy loss of the clean answer, which is more suitable for heteroge-neous binary, open-ended, and safety-related questions. 

(b.1) Graph-Context-Guided Node Selection 

Before optimization, high-impact QA nodes are selected according to graph-context importance. For each QA pair 

(qk, a k), the importance score is 

Ik = αdDk + βg Gk + γsSk, (15) where Dk, Gk, and Sk denote the dependency prior, gradi-ent influence, and semantic importance, respectively. The gradient influence is defined as 

Gk = ∥∇ X CE ( fθ (X , q k), a k)∥1

max j ∥∇ X CE ( fθ (X , q j ), a j )∥1 + ε . (16) The selected node set is denoted by S. In practice, we pri-oritize {B, P 3, P 2, P 1}, corresponding to behavior, plan-ning/safety, prediction, and perception-related questions. 

(b.2) Region- and Attention-Aware Perturbation Al-location 

To avoid uniform perturbation, we construct a spatial budget using semantic regions and attention priors. Let 

Msky (u), Mobj (u), and Mbg (u) denote the sky, object, and background masks. The region prior is 

R(u) = ωsky Msky (u) + ωobj Mobj (u) + ωbg Mbg (u)max( ωsky , ω obj , ω bg ) .

(17) Given an attention map A(u), we sharpen it as 

eA(u) = A(u)γa . (18) The spatial weight and perturbation budget are then 

W (u) = αr R(u) + αa eA(u)

αr + αa

, (19) Table 13. QA subtype weights. 

Subtype Weight Subtype Weight 

important objects 1.0 moving status 1.0 

sign barrier 4.0 attention 2.0 

future 1.0 action 2.5 

collision 3.0 safe action 4.0 

behavior 2.0 motion 2.0 

other 1.0 

ϵ(u) = ϵmin + ( ϵmax − ϵmin )W (u). (20) For object-centric subtypes, including sign barrier ,

moving status , action , and collision , the local budget around the referenced object is further amplified: 

ϵ(u) ← min ( bobj ϵ(u), ϵ max ) , u ∈ N (ok), (21) where N (ok) denotes the neighborhood of the referenced object. 

(b.3) Subtype-Aware Untargeted QA Loss 

For each selected node, we maximize the CE loss of its clean answer. To account for subtype difficulty and safety relevance, we define 

Lqa = 1

P 

> k∈S

ρτ (qk )

X

> k∈S

ρτ (qk ) cCE 



fθ ( eX adv , q k), a k



,

(22) where τ (qk) denotes the subtype, ρτ (qk ) is its weight, and 

eX adv is the transformed adversarial input after EOT [3]. To prevent a few large-loss samples from dominating optimiza-tion, we use the soft CE cap 

cCE = c · tanh 

 CE 

c



. (23) Higher weights are assigned to sign barrier ,

safe action , and collision so that difficult safety-critical nodes are not diluted by easier free-form questions. 

(b.4) Multi-View and Single-View Feature Disruption 

In addition to answer-level disruption, we perturb the visual representation space through global multi-view and random single-view losses. Let zclean all and zadv all denote pooled features from all six clean and adversarial views. The global feature loss is 

Lall f eat = λmse zadv all − zclean all  

> 22

− λcos cos  zadv all , z clean all 

 .

(24) At iteration t, a camera index is sampled as 

ct ∼ Uniform( {1, . . . , 6}), (25) and the single-view loss is 

Lcam f eat = λmse zadv ct − zclean ct 

> 22

− λcos cos  zadv ct , z clean ct

 .

(26) The combined feature loss is 

Lf eat = Lall f eat + 1[t mod mcam = 0] Lcam f eat . (27) The final objective is 

max  

> δ

L = Lf eat + λqa Lqa , (28) subject to 

|δ(u)| ≤ ϵ(u), X adv ∈ [0 , 1] . (29) 

(b.5) RST-Style EOT and MIM Optimization 

During optimization, EOT [3] is applied using the ran-dom similarity transformation strategy adopted in RST [15, 16]: eX adv t = Tξ

 X adv t ; βeot 

 , (30) where Tξ is a random affine or similarity transformation and 

βeot controls its strength. We optimize the adversarial images using MIM [5]. The normalized gradient is 

¯gt = ∇X adv t L

mean 



|∇ X adv t L| 



+ ε. (31) Momentum and adversarial images are updated as 

vt+1 = μv t + ¯ gt, (32) 

X adv t+1 = Π ϵ

 X adv t + ηt · sign( vt+1 ) . (33) The step size follows a warm-start cosine decay schedule: 

ηt =

(

η, t ≤ 0.1T, 

> η
> 2

1 + cos  π t−0.1T

> 0.9T

 , t > 0.1T. (34) After each iteration, the image is projected onto the adaptive perturbation set and clipped to [0 , 1] . The final output is 

X adv T .

(c) Experiments (c.1) Implementation Details 

The target model is locally reproduced and kept frozen throughout adversarial optimization. The implementation is based on PyTorch and CUDA. Each scene contains six camera images and one QA.json file, while the data, LLaMA, checkpoint, and output paths are provided through command-line arguments. For spatial perturbation allocation, we set 

ωsky = 0 .6, ωobj = 1 .0, ωbg = 0 .8, (35) 

αr = 0 .4, αa = 0 .6, γa = 2 .0. (36) For object-centric subtypes, the local boost uses radius 

robj = 24 and factor bobj = 1 .2. For graph-context node selection, we use 

αd = 0 .5, βg = 1 .0, γs = 1 .0, (37) Table 14. Progressive ablation results on the official evaluation.                    

> Configuration Score Gain Baseline: MIM + RST-EOT + Lall f eat 50.23 –+ Region- and attention-aware perturbation 52.62 +2.39 + Random single-view feature loss 53.92 +1.30 + Graph-guided node selection and QA loss 62.26 +8.34 + Subtype-aware QA weighting 64.58 +2.32 + Soft CE cap ( c= 8 )68.16 +3.58 + Soft CE cap ( c= 5 )71.19 +3.03

with focus categories {B, P 3, P 2, P 1}.The attack uses T = 1500 , affine EOT with βeot = 0 .25 ,momentum coefficient μ = 0 .4, and mcam = 1 . The final configuration is 

ϵmin = 8 /255 , ϵmax = 10 /255 , η = 0 .7/255 , (38) 

λqa = 1 , λmse = 2 .5, λcos = 2 .5, c = 5 . (39) The image-question misalignment loss, concept loss, and adversarial suffix are excluded from the final configura-tion. For high-resolution inputs, images are resized to 

224 × 224 during forward propagation, while gradients are back-propagated to the original-resolution adversarial im-ages. 

(c.2) Ablation Study 

We conduct a progressive ablation study to assess each component. Because the local evaluator does not exactly reproduce the official metric, we report official submission scores. Some submissions differ slightly in hyperparame-ters, but the overall trend remains informative. As shown in Table 14, the baseline achieves 50.23. Region- and attention-aware perturbation raises the score to 52.62, and random single-view feature disruption further improves it to 53.92. The largest gain comes from graph-context-guided node selection and untargeted QA optimiza-tion, increasing the score to 62.26. Subtype-aware weight-ing reaches 64.58 by emphasizing difficult safety-critical questions. Finally, the soft CE cap stabilizes the QA ob-jective, yielding 68.16 with c = 8 and 71.19 with c = 5 .Overall, the full method improves the official score by 20.96 points over the baseline. 

(d) Conclusion 

We present a graph-context-guided untargeted attack for multi-view driving VQA. The method jointly disrupts global and camera-specific visual features while allocat-ing perturbations according to semantic regions, attention, QA subtype, and graph-context importance. Progressive ablation results show that graph-guided QA optimization provides the largest improvement, while subtype-aware weighting and the soft CE cap further strengthen attack ef-fectiveness and optimization stability. The final configura-tion achieves an official score of 71.19, improving the base-line by 20.96 points. 

4.5. Case Study: Team JNU AdvML 

4.5.1. Introduction and Competition Analysis 

The CVPR 2026 @ AdvML Workshop Challenge stud-ies adversarial multimodal attacks against vision-language agents in autonomous-driving scenarios. Unlike conven-tional image-classification attacks, each driving scene in this challenge contains six synchronized camera views and a set of question-answer pairs. The submitted adversarial example must therefore preserve the official scene struc-ture while replacing the six-view images and, when nec-essary, only making restricted changes to the textual input. This setting introduces three practical difficulties. First, the model decision is based on multi-view visual evidence and language-conditioned reasoning, so attacking a single view or a single output logit is often insufficient to consistently disrupt the final response. Second, the evaluation involves black-box target models that may differ from the available surrogate in visual encoders, multimodal adapters, token or-ganizations, and decoding behaviors. Hence, an attack opti-mized only against the final answer distribution of one sur-rogate can easily overfit to surrogate-specific coordinates and fail to transfer. Third, submitted images are saved as JPEG files and packed under file-size constraints, which re-quires the perturbation to be visually acceptable and robust to compression. Based on these observations, we design a feature-space attack that avoids directly optimizing the final generated text. Instead, we maximize the semantic discrepancy be-tween clean and adversarial samples inside the multimodal model. In particular, we attack the visual-query bridge be-tween the visual encoder and the language model, the hid-den states after visual injection in the LLM adapter lay-ers, and the multi-layer CLS tokens of the CLIP visual encoder. To reduce coordinate-level overfitting, these fea-tures are compared as semantic subspaces on the Grass-mann manifold rather than as flattened Euclidean vec-tors. The final method can be summarized as a multi-feature Grassmann semantic perturbation attack for six-view DriveLM/LLaMA-Adapter scenes. 

4.5.2. Methodology Overall optimization. For each driving scene, let 

{xi}6 

> i=1

denote the six camera-view images. The goal is to generate adversarial images {xadv  

> i

}6 

> i=1

under an ℓ∞ per-turbation budget: 

xadv  

> i

= xi + δi, ∥δi∥∞ ≤ ϵ, i = 1 , . . . , 6. (40) In our final submission, the six views of one scene are opti-mized jointly as a tensor of shape [1 , 6, C, H, W ] rather than being attacked independently. We use momentum iterative gradient updates following MI-FGSM [5], with the default configuration ϵ = 16 /255 , step size α = 1 /255 , momen-tum decay 1.0, and T = 1000 iterations. At each iteration, the objective is to enlarge the semantic feature discrepancy between the clean scene and the current adversarial scene. 

Multi-feature attack objective. The final loss combines three complementary feature branches: visual-query fea-tures, LLM hidden states, and CLIP multi-layer CLS fea-tures. Let Lvq , Lllm , and Lclip denote the corresponding Grassmann losses. The total objective is 

Ltotal = λvq Lvq + λllm Lllm + λclip Lclip 

λvq + λllm + λclip 

, (41) where the final weights are λvq = 1 .0, λllm = 0 .1, and 

λclip = 0.1. The visual-query branch is assigned the largest weight because it directly controls how visual infor-mation is injected into the language model. The LLM hid-den branch uses the first four adapter-injection layers, i.e., layers 0–3, with no pooling and with the answer text used to construct the hidden-state extraction prompt. The CLIP multi-layer CLS branch provides hierarchical visual seman-tics from different Transformer blocks and improves the sta-bility of the perturbation across visual abstraction levels. 

Grassmann projection distance. A key design choice is to compare features at the subspace level. For a feature branch, we reshape the extracted feature tensor into a two-dimensional matrix Z ∈ RN ×D , where N represents the number of views, tokens, layers, or their flattened combina-tions, and D denotes the feature dimension. We first center the feature matrix: 

¯Z = Z − 1

N 11 ⊤Z. (42) Then we perform singular value decomposition, 

¯Z = U ΣV ⊤, (43) select the first K right singular vectors as the subspace ba-sis, 

Q = V[: ,1: K] ∈ RD×K , (44) and construct the projection matrix P = QQ ⊤. Given clean and adversarial features, the Grassmann projection loss is defined as 

Lgrass = ∥Padv − Pclean ∥F = Qadv Q⊤ 

> adv

− Qclean Q⊤  

> clean F

.

(45) This formulation does not force element-wise alignment in a fixed coordinate system. Instead, it measures the dis-crepancy between the principal semantic subspaces spanned by multi-view, multi-token, and multi-layer representations. We found this design more suitable for transferable attacks against heterogeneous MLLMs, where coordinate bases and feature scales may vary across models. 

Input diversity and JPEG-aware optimization. To im-prove transferability and robustness, we apply diverse trans-formations during optimization. The transformation pool includes random resizing and padding, random crop-and-resize, affine translation and scaling, brightness and contrast perturbations, mild Gaussian blur, Cutout, and block shuf-fle with rotation [12, 23]. When block shuffle is enabled, we concatenate the normally transformed adversarial sam-ple and the shuffled version in the same optimization step, which approximates the expectation 

ET

Ltotal (T (xadv ), x ) . (46) This reduces overfitting to a single input layout and im-proves robustness to view-level and local-structure varia-tions. Since the final submission is stored in JPEG format, we also introduce JPEG-BPDA optimization. In the for-ward pass, the adversarial image is compressed by JPEG with quality q = 98 :

ˆxadv = JPEG( xadv ; q). (47) Because JPEG is not differentiable, the backward pass ap-proximates its derivative with the identity mapping, i.e., 

∂JPEG( x)/∂x ≈ I. This makes the generated examples more stable after saving and packaging. 

4.5.3. Experimental Results and Ablation Studies 

The final submission keeps the original QA file format unchanged and mainly relies on image-side adversarial perturbations. The default configuration is summa-rized as follows: model name=LORA-BIAS-7B ,

eps=16/255 , alpha=1/255 , steps=1000 ,

distance type=grassmann proj ,

normalize feature=True ,

grassmann k ratio=1.0 ,

llm hidden layers=0,1,2,3 ,

diversity prob=0.7 ,

max diverse transforms=3 ,

shuffle repeat times=1 , jpeg qualities=98 ,and save jpeg quality=98 . The method can be run on a single 24GB GPU, while larger memory allows stronger transformation ensembles or more feature layers. We summarizes the main ablation observations. The visual-query branch provides the most stable baseline be-cause it directly disrupts the bridge between the visual encoder and the LLM. Adding the shallow LLM hidden states from adapter-injection layers 0–3 further improves attack effectiveness by influencing the early language-side semantic states after visual injection. However, extending the hidden-state branch to too many deeper layers can in-troduce language-prior noise and gradient conflicts. The CLIP multi-layer CLS branch is helpful when used with a small weight, as it regularizes the perturbation with hierar-chical visual semantics without overwhelming the visual-query objective. We also observe that Grassmann projec-tion distance is more robust than direct ℓ2 or cosine dis-tance, since it emphasizes dominant semantic subspaces rather than coordinate-level perturbations. Finally, input di-versity and JPEG-BPDA are important for maintaining at-tack strength after image saving and submission compres-sion. 

4.5.4. Conclusion 

We present a multi-feature Grassmann semantic pertur-bation attack for adversarial vision-language agents in autonomous-driving scenarios. Instead of optimizing only the final answer, our method attacks the internal semantic pathway from six-view visual encoding to language rea-soning. By combining visual-query features, shallow LLM hidden states, CLIP multi-layer CLS tokens, Grassmann projection distance, input diversity, and JPEG-BPDA, the final solution balances transferability, compression robust-ness, and submission constraints. This case study suggests that transferable attacks on MLLMs can benefit from ma-nipulating shared semantic subspaces rather than surrogate-specific Euclidean feature coordinates. 

4.6. Case Study: team hymeng 

4.6.1. Introduction and Competition Analysis 

The challenge evaluates adversarial multimodal attacks against autonomous-driving vision-language agents (VLAs). Each DriveLM-style scene contains six camera views and a structured QA.json file covering perception, object relations, motion, and driving decisions [22]. In Phase II, submissions are evaluated on DriveLM-Agent and an undisclosed black-box model. This setting empha-sizes transferability and makes model-specific gradient optimization unavailable. 

Related work. Recent vision-language models, includ-ing CLIP [20], BLIP [11], Flamingo [1], and LLaVA [14], demonstrate strong cross-modal reasoning but also expose new attack surfaces. For safety-critical autonomous driv-ing, DriveLM formalizes driving QA as graph visual ques-tion answering [22], while recent studies have started to investigate adversarial attacks on VLMs in driving scenar-ios [30]. Our setting is closer to a typographic attack : multi-modal models can respond strongly to readable text embed-ded in images [8], and typographic visual prompts have also been used to expose cross-modal safety weaknesses in large VLAs [9]. Related LVLM attack studies also show that vi-sual or adversarial prompts can transfer across models [29]. Q-STAR does not claim typography itself as the novelty. Its contribution is a driving-specific pipeline that derives com-pact attack semantics from structured QA evidence, com-pletes them into a scene-level risk vocabulary, and deploys them consistently across multiple camera views. 

Structured QA mining 

QA.json → objects, cameras, QA types, risk cues 

⇓

Constrained semantic planning 

anchor phrases → scene-level six-phrase vocabulary 

⇓

Validated multi-view rendering 

seeded placement, 12-pixel text, non-overlap, six camera views 

> Figure 4. Q-STAR converts structured driving QA evidence into a compact scene-level typographic attack.

The QA coordinates were useful for associating object ids with cameras and for constructing an anchor-aware ren-derer. However, our final branch deliberately decouples se-mantic grounding from spatial placement : QA structure de-termines what phrases are generated, whereas the phrases are placed at seeded non-overlapping positions. Under otherwise comparable 16-pixel rendering, random place-ment obtained 59.30 compared with 58.75 for anchor-aware placement. Because both are single online submissions, we treat the 0.55-point difference as an empirical trend rather than a statistically established margin. 

4.6.2. Methodology 

We call the resulting method Q-STAR , short for QA-Structured Typographic Adversarial Rendering . It con-sists of three stages, summarized in Fig. 4. 

Structured QA mining. We deterministically parse each 

QA.json into attack brief.json , recording object ids, cameras, coordinates, question types, answer-derived states, and candidate attack cues. A compact representa-tion, attack brief compact.json , removes redun-dant language while preserving high-value yes/no, motion, action, and collision evidence. Coordinates are retained for camera association and diagnostics, but are not used as the final placement target. 

Constrained semantic planning. We use the hosted model identifier qwen3.6-plus as a semantic planner. The first call assigns one short English phrase to every se-lected anchor and returns phrase allocation.json .Generation uses temperature 0.2, a strict JSON schema, target-id coverage, phrase-length constraints, and manda-tory candidate selection for high-confidence anchors. Re-quests are retried up to three times, followed by one format-and-constraint repair call when necessary. Anchor phrases alone may provide incomplete scene coverage. A second constrained call therefore builds a scene-level phrase vocabulary. Existing anchors remain fixed; if fewer than six unique phrases are present, the model generates exactly the missing number. Supplemen-tary phrases target risk, blockage, collision, traffic control, and driving-control semantics. We refer to this fixed-cap completion strategy as scene vocabulary completion , avoid-ing implementation-specific names such as “fill-6” in the method description. 

Validated multi-view rendering. The completed vocab-ulary is rendered on every camera view using Times New Roman Bold, white glyphs, a one-pixel black outline, and a Pillow FreeType size of 12 pixels. Locations are sam-pled with seed 42 and accepted only when the text bounding boxes remain inside the image and do not overlap. Each im-age receives six unique phrases. Across all 1,200 Phase II images, the union of the non-overlapping text bounding boxes occupies 7.72% of image area on average (median 7.68%, range 6.30–9.61%). This is a visible semantic over-lay rather than an imperceptible perturbation; the glyph-level modified area is smaller than this bounding-box upper bound. For the anchor-aware baseline, object-bound phrases are placed near their associated QA coordinates, while sup-plementary scene-level phrases use random valid positions. The selected Q-STAR branch instead places all six phrases at seeded random valid positions. All intermediate JSON artifacts are stored per scene, al-lowing generation and rendering failures to be audited in-dependently. The submitted code package contains the rule extractors, constrained generation scripts, rendering logic, and validation routines. 

4.6.3. Experimental Results Evaluation protocol. The organizer-reported Phase II on-line score is a higher-is-better composite averaged over DriveLM-Agent and a hidden black-box model. Accord-ing to the challenge protocol, it jointly rewards attack effec-tiveness and penalizes input perturbation magnitude. The server does not expose the two components separately. Each row below is one online submission under a fixed configu-ration; therefore, small differences should be interpreted as empirical trends rather than confidence intervals. Q-STAR obtains 60.63, compared with 36.71 for unmod-ified inputs, an absolute improvement of 23.92. Tables 15 and 16 separate rendering controls from semantic-content controls. 

Analysis. The results support three conclusions. First, moderate text size is preferable: 12-pixel text gives the highest observed score, while both larger and smaller text reduce the composite objective. Because these are single online runs, we treat the 1.33-point gap to the 16-pixel ran-dom variant as a trend rather than a statistically established                                    

> Rendering configuration Score Changed factor
> Q-STAR, 12 px 60.63 Selected configu-ration Random placement, 16 px 59.30 Text size Anchor-aware placement, 16 px 58.75 Placement strategy Random placement, 18 px 57.63 Text size Random placement, 8 px 56.70 Text size Side views ≤4, 16 px 41.17 View coverage Table 15. Rendering ablations. All variants use the same struc-tured phrase-generation pipeline.
> Semantic configuration Score Changed factor
> Q-STAR mixed vocabulary 60.63 Selected configu-ration Behavior/risk phrases only 53.38 Phrase composi-tion Object-like phrases only 44.62 Phrase composi-tion Q0 direction phrases 47.55 Evidence source Cue-oriented text suffix 37.84 Attack modality No attack 36.71 Original inputs Table 16. Semantic and modality ablations. Rendering is held as close as possible to the selected branch.

margin. At 16 pixels, random placement also modestly ex-ceeds anchor-aware placement (59.30 versus 58.75), sup-porting our final choice without implying that precise spa-tial grounding is irrelevant. Second, multi-view coverage matters substantially; reducing the four side cameras to at most four phrases causes the largest rendering-side degra-dation. Third, the mixed vocabulary is more effective than either object-like or behavior/risk phrases alone. Object terms provide grounding, while behavior and risk terms tar-get action-level reasoning. Text suffixes offered little benefit over the unmodified baseline. A plausible explanation is that an appended cue may be ignored as unnatural language noise, whereas visi-ble text is processed through the visual pathway across all camera views. The Q0-only variant also underperforms, showing that the first object-summary answer does not con-tain all motion and decision evidence available in later QA pairs. 

4.6.4. Responsible Use and Limitations 

Q-STAR is developed solely for authorized robustness eval-uation. Typographic attacks are visible and may not re-flect stealthy real-world manipulations; our results should therefore be interpreted as evidence of semantic vulnera-bility rather than a complete physical threat model. The online server permits only a small number of submissions, so our study does not estimate variance across multiple random seeds. The proprietary black-box model and de-composed evaluation metrics are also unavailable, limiting causal attribution. We disclose the method to support de-fensive research on visual-text filtering, cross-modal con-sistency checking, and robust driving-scene reasoning. 

4.6.5. Conclusion 

Q-STAR combines structured QA mining, constrained risk-phrase planning, scene vocabulary completion, and vali-dated multi-view typographic rendering. The anchor-aware comparison indicates that compact, diverse, and consis-tently presented scene semantics are at least as important as exact object-centered placement. This structure-aware for-mulation improves the online composite score from 36.71 to 60.63 while remaining auditable through deterministic intermediate artifacts and rendering checks. 

4.7. Cross-Team Comparative Discussion 

The five case studies occupy distinct regions of the attack-design space. Table 17 compares them from the organizers’ perspective. The central distinction is not simply whether a method uses gradients, but how it allocates a limited attack budget across visual evidence, language suffixes, six-view consistency, QA types, and submission robustness. Several conclusions follow from this comparison. First, the final leaderboard favors attacks that remain effective when the public model is no longer the sole target. MR-CAS and team tong reach the top two through very differ-ent mechanisms, yet both avoid specializing exclusively to a single final-answer loss. MR-CAS uses visible distractors designed to exploit broad multimodal shortcuts, whereas team tong incorporates transfer-oriented components such as momentum, input diversity, translation-invariant smooth-ing, and best-delta selection. Second, suffixes are most useful when deployed selec-tively. A generic suffix can conflict with the image attack, increase the length penalty, and behave inconsistently un-der hidden prompt formats. team tong provides the clearest positive example: its suffixes are short, QA-type-specific, and explicitly suppressed for Q M OTION , where cross-modal conflict was observed. The other high-ranking case-study teams largely avoid suffixes, demonstrating that a structured image-side attack can be competitive on its own. Third, task structure matters. WZBC AbeLiuXL and team hymeng both exploit QA.json , but in different ways. WZBC AbeLiuXL uses QA nodes to decide where opti-mization effort should go, whereas team hymeng uses QA evidence to generate short visual phrases. These approaches point to the same underlying weakness: driving VLAs can be steered by task-level semantic cues, not only by low-level pixel noise. Fourth, several reports show that submission details form part of the practical threat model. JPEG encoding, opacity, font size, rendering area, step count, and perturbation bud-get affect the official score because the evaluator processes submitted files rather than idealized optimization variables. Consequently, implementation-level ablations are often as informative as comparisons among high-level objectives. 

4.8. Innovation Highlights from Top Teams 

The first major highlight is the shift from output-level at-tacks to pathway-level attacks. JNU AdvML explicitly avoids optimizing only the final generated answer and in-stead disrupts the visual-query bridge, shallow LLM hid-den states, and CLIP visual features. WZBC AbeLiuXL similarly combines answer-level QA loss with global and camera-specific feature disruption. This trend suggests that the internal visual-to-language pathway is a useful target for transferable VLA attacks. The second highlight is structured perturbation alloca-tion. Uniform image noise is rarely optimal in a scene with six views and heterogeneous questions. WZBC AbeLiuXL allocates perturbation budget by semantic region, atten-tion, object-centric subtype, and graph-context importance. team tong allocates gradient direction by QA difficulty and suppresses suffixes when they conflict with image-side tar-gets. These designs turn the official QA structure into an attack prior. The third highlight is the strength of visible text-like vi-sual cues. MR-CAS shows that optimized random char-acter strings can degrade responses without relying on lit-eral semantics, while team hymeng shows that concise risk phrases mined from QA.json can transfer through the vi-sual pathway. This exposes a practical vulnerability: VLAs may over-trust readable or text-like content inside camera images, even when it conflicts with the real scene. The fourth highlight is compression and submission ro-bustness. Several reports discuss JPEG quality, BPDA, opacity, font size, and rendering area. These details are not cosmetic; they determine whether an attack survives the ac-tual submission pipeline. Future benchmarks should there-fore treat file format and compression as part of the threat model rather than a post-processing detail. 

4.9. Metric and Design Trade-Offs 

The composite evaluation metric creates a multi-objective attack problem. If an attack increases answer deviation but strongly changes the images or appends long suffixes, its fi-nal score may not improve. Conversely, a highly impercep-tible perturbation can receive a poor score if it does not re-liably alter the model’s answers. This explains why the top methods do not simply maximize perturbation magnitude or suffix length. They search for operating points where the answer-deviation gain is large enough to compensate for the visual and textual costs. Using the notation from Section 2.5, attack design can be understood through three coupled decisions: 

∆Score ≈ ∆A· ¯S·C(ℓ)+ A·∆ ¯S·C(ℓ)+ A· ¯S·∆C(ℓ). (48) Table 17. Organizer-side comparison of the five technical reports.                                              

> Team Main modality Text strategy Transfer mechanism Robustness / metric awareness Strongest reported evi-dence Phase II score MR-CAS Visual rendering No suffix; avoids length penalty Local blur plus global character distractors selected with surro-gate feedback Opacity control, deterministic layout, JPEG-friendly visible patterns Blur+distractor with optimized strings reaches local score 42.1650 76.63 team tong Image PGD plus suffixes Type-selective short suf-fixes; suppresses motion conflict NI, MI, DI, TI, best-delta track-ing, adaptive QA weights
> ϵ=32 /255 ,400 steps, JPEG quality 95, suffix penalty 0.9632 v1 to v5 leaderboard score improves from 45.90 to 75.93 75.93 WZBC AbeLiuXL Image gradients guided by QA graph Mainly image-side; avoids suffix cost Graph node selection, random single-view feature disruption, RST-EOT, MIM Adaptive spatial budget and subtype weighting under ϵ=8/255 –10 /255
> Official ablation im-proves from 50.23 to 71.19 71.19 JNU AdvML Internal multimodal fea-tures Keeps QA format un-changed Grassmann subspace disruption over visual-query, LLM hidden, and CLIP branches Input diversity, JPEG-BPDA, 1000-step MI-FGSM at ϵ=16 /255
> Feature-branch analy-sis identifies visual-query bridge as stable target 69.26 team hymeng Visible typographic ren-dering No suffix; QA evidence becomes visual text Model-agnostic scene vocabu-lary rendered across all views Fixed font, seed, non-overlap placement, average text area 7.72% Q-STAR improves from no-attack 36.71 to 60.63 60.63

Table 18. How top teams navigate the evaluation trade-off.                                       

> Team Main score gain Main score cost Design response MR-CAS Visual distraction and object evidence removal Visible overlays may reduce image simi-larity Avoid text suffixes; tune opacity and string placement team tong Transfer-oriented PGD plus targeted suffixes Suffix length and JPEG attenuation Use short type-specific suffixes and quality-aware PGD budget WZBC AbeLiuXL Graph-guided feature and QA disruption Budget must cover six views and many QA types Allocate pertur-bation by node, subtype, and re-gion importance JNU AdvML Semantic drift inside multimodal path-ways Feature losses can conflict across branches Use weighted Grassmann objectives and JPEG-BPDA team hymeng Typographic seman-tic shortcut transfer Readable text consumes image-similarity budget Use compact phrases, fixed 12px rendering, and all-view coverage

The first term rewards stronger answer deviation, the sec-ond captures the effect of image degradation, and the third captures the cost of longer suffixes. Although the offi-cial evaluator is more complex than this local approxima-tion, the decomposition helps interpret the submitted meth-ods. MR-CAS accepts visible character distractors while avoiding suffix cost. team tong spends a small suffix bud-get only when the suffix complements the image attack. WZBC AbeLiuXL and JNU AdvML seek to increase ∆A

through structured feature disruption while leaving the sub-mitted questions nearly unchanged. Q-STAR spends image-similarity budget on readable typography and relies on a cross-modal semantic shortcut rather than gradient access. The trade-off analysis also clarifies why Phase II rank-ings differ from Phase I. In the known-model phase, a method can overfit the public model’s response patterns and still perform well. In the hidden-model phase, the most valuable perturbations are those that remain mean-ingful after model, preprocessing, prompt formatting, and decoding differences. This shifts the optimal design to-ward model-agnostic visual cues, transfer-enhancing gra-dient transformations, and intermediate representation at-tacks. The final leaderboard therefore measures not only adversarial strength, but also how well each team manages the cost structure of the metric under black-box uncertainty. 

## 5. Insights and Future Directions 

The competition reveals that the robustness of driving VLAs is jointly affected by multi-view perception, cross-modal interaction, intermediate representations, and practi-cal input-processing pipelines. The submitted methods fur-ther show that successful attacks often exploit task structure and model behavior rather than relying solely on generic pixel perturbations. Based on these observations, we sum-marize the main lessons and discuss corresponding defense and benchmark directions. 

5.1. Lessons Learned 

❶ Multi-view fragility. Six-view perception does not in-herently guarantee adversarial robustness. Coordinated per-turbations can influence shared representations across mul-tiple cameras, while attacks on common semantic pathways may affect predictions beyond the modified view. Multi-view inputs should be treated as a structured attack surface that requires explicit cross-view robustness mechanisms. 

❷ Cross-modal coupling. Image perturbations and text suffixes may either reinforce or interfere with each other. A suffix effective for one QA category may conflict with the image-side objective for another, while long suffixes also introduce additional evaluation cost. Effective joint at-tacks therefore require task-dependent coordination rather than independent optimization of the two modalities. 

❸ Task-aware vulnerability. Different QA categories vary in difficulty, safety relevance, and sensitivity to perturba-tions. Object recognition, motion reasoning, collision as-sessment, and planning rely on different visual evidence and reasoning pathways. Type-aware weighting, graph depen-dencies, and category-specific objectives can consequently provide priors for attack design and robustness analysis. 

❹ Semantic shortcuts. Visible text, character distrac-tors, and risk-related phrases can strongly influence driving VLAs, particularly when repeated across views or aligned with safety-critical concepts. Feature-level attacks fur-ther expose weaknesses in visual-query interfaces and early multimodal layers. These results suggest that current mod-els may over-rely on salient semantic cues without suffi-ciently verifying their consistency with the driving scene. 

5.2. Defense Directions 

❶ Consistency checks. Defenses should verify whether local visual evidence, recognized text, and generated re-sponses are consistent across camera views and modalities. OCR-aware filtering can identify suspicious textual over-lays, while cross-view reasoning can detect cues that con-tradict the broader scene. Such verification should consider camera geometry, object correspondence, and language-conditioned predictions jointly. 

❷ Task-aware robustness. Robust training should explic-itly account for heterogeneous QA categories and their as-sociated safety risks. Greater emphasis should be placed on collision assessment, safe-action prediction, traffic-control understanding, and other safety-critical tasks. Category-level evaluation is also necessary to distinguish robustness improvements from gains concentrated on easier questions. 

❸ Feature protection. Several attacks target visual-query embeddings, adapter layers, and multimodal alignment spaces before final answer generation. Defenses should therefore improve representation stability throughout the reasoning pipeline using consistency regularization, robust feature training, uncertainty estimation, or anomaly detec-tion. Protecting only the final decoder output is unlikely to prevent semantic drift introduced at earlier stages. 

❹ Pipeline robustness. JPEG compression, resizing, file encoding, typography, and rendering settings can mate-rially affect attack performance. Robustness evaluation should therefore include realistic preprocessing and file-transformation pipelines rather than relying only on ideal-ized in-memory perturbations. This would provide a more faithful estimate of deployment-time security. 

5.3. Future Competition Design 

❶ Temporal settings. Future challenges could extend the current six-view image setting to video sequences or closed-loop interaction. Such settings would evaluate whether ad-versarial effects persist across frames, remain temporally coherent, and influence downstream planning decisions. Temporal consistency could also serve as an additional sig-nal for attack detection and defense. 

❷ Defense tracks. Dedicated defense tracks could evaluate methods for detecting, filtering, or recovering from adver-sarial multimodal inputs. Assessing attacks and defenses under the same data, preprocessing pipeline, and hidden-model protocol would enable a more systematic comparison of offensive and defensive progress. 

❸ Transparent evaluation. Future benchmarks could ex-pose decomposed validation metrics for answer deviation, image similarity, suffix cost, and cross-model transferabil-ity. At the same time, hidden test scenes, preprocessing pipelines, and evaluation models should be retained for the final ranking. This design would improve interpretability while limiting excessive adaptation to the public evaluator. Overall, future VLA safety benchmarks should evalu-ate robustness across views, modalities, temporal contexts, model architectures, and intermediate reasoning stages. A broader evaluation protocol would better reflect the complexity of autonomous-driving systems and provide stronger evidence of practical safety improvements. 

## 6. Conclusion 

The CVPR 2026@AdvML Workshop Challenge estab-lishes a focused benchmark for evaluating adversarial mul-timodal robustness in autonomous-driving VLAs. By inte-grating six-view driving scenes, suffix-only textual pertur-bations, image-fidelity constraints, and cross-model trans-fer evaluation, the challenge captures vulnerabilities that are specific to vision-language reasoning in safety-critical driving scenarios. The leading submissions explore diverse technical routes, including visual distractors, type-aware suffix optimization, graph-guided perturbation, semantic-subspace attacks, and QA-driven typographic rendering. Together, these results demonstrate that the safety of driving VLAs cannot be assessed solely through final-answer accu-racy, but must also consider visual grounding, multi-view perception, cross-modal alignment, intermediate represen-tations, and transferability across models. 

## Acknowledgments 

We would like to express our sincere gratitude to all indi-viduals and organizations who contributed to the success of the CVPR 2026@AdvML Workshop Challenge. Our heart-felt thanks go to the participants for their innovative submis-sions, the organizing committee for their tireless efforts, and the sponsors and supporting institutions for their generous support. Without their collective dedication and expertise, this challenge would not have been possible. 

## References  

> [1] Jean-Baptiste Alayrac, Jeff Donahue, Pauline Luc, Antoine Miech, Iain Barr, Yana Hasson, Karel Lenc, Arthur Mensch, Katherine Millican, and Malcolm Reynolds. Flamingo: A

visual language model for few-shot learning. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , 35, 2022. 1, 15 [2] Anish Athalye, Nicholas Carlini, and David Wagner. Obfus-cated gradients give a false sense of security: Circumventing defenses to adversarial examples. In ICML , 2018. 1 [3] Anish Athalye, Logan Engstrom, Andrew Ilyas, and Kevin Kwok. Synthesizing robust adversarial examples. In ICML ,2018. 5, 12 [4] Francesco Croce and Matthias Hein. Reliable evalua-tion of adversarial robustness with an ensemble of diverse parameter-free attacks. In ICML , 2020. 1, 9 [5] Yinpeng Dong, Fangzhou Liao, Tianyu Pang, Hang Su, Jun Zhu, Xiaolin Hu, and Jianguo Li. Boosting adversarial at-tacks with momentum. In CVPR , 2018. 5, 8, 9, 12, 14 [6] Yinpeng Dong, Tianyu Pang, Hang Su, and Jun Zhu. Evading defenses to transferable adversarial examples by translation-invariant attacks. In CVPR , 2019. 5, 9 [7] Peng Gao, Jiaming Han, Renrui Zhang, Ziyi Lin, Shijie Geng, Aojun Zhou, Wei Zhang, Pan Lu, Conghui He, Xi-angyu Yue, Hongsheng Li, and Yu Qiao. LLaMA-adapter V2: Parameter-efficient visual instruction model. arXiv preprint arXiv:2304.15010 , 2023. 1, 8 [8] Gabriel Goh, Nick Cammarata, Chelsea Voss, Shan Carter, Michael Petrov, Ludwig Schubert, Alec Radford, and Chris Olah. Multimodal neurons in artificial neural networks. Dis-till , 6(3):e30, 2021. 5, 15 [9] Yichen Gong, Delong Ran, Jinyuan Liu, Conglei Wang, Tianshuo Cong, Anyu Wang, Sisi Duan, and Xiaoyun Wang. Figstep: Jailbreaking large vision-language models via typo-graphic visual prompts. In AAAI , 2025. 5, 15 [10] Ian J. Goodfellow, Jonathon Shlens, and Christian Szegedy. Explaining and harnessing adversarial examples. In ICLR ,2015. 1, 8, 11 [11] Junnan Li, Dongxu Li, Caiming Xiong, and Steven Hoi. Blip: Bootstrapping language-image pre-training for unified vision-language understanding and generation. In ICML ,2022. 1, 15 [12] Yuanbo Li, Tianyang Xu, Cong Hu, Tao Zhou, Xiao-Jun Wu, and Josef Kittler. Multi-paradigm collaborative adversarial attack against multi-modal large language models. In CVPR ,pages 30065–30075, 2026. 14 [13] Jiadong Lin, Chuanbiao Song, Kun He, Liwei Wang, and John E. Hopcroft. Nesterov accelerated gradient and scale invariance for adversarial attacks. In ICLR , 2020. 8 [14] Haotian Liu, Chunyuan Li, Qingyang Wu, and Yong Jae Lee. Visual instruction tuning. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , 36, 2023. 1, 15 [15] Xiaoliang Liu, Furao Shen, Jian Zhao, and Changhai Nie. RSTAM: An effective black-box impersonation attack on face recognition using a mobile and compact printer. arXiv preprint arXiv:2206.12590 , 2022. 12 [16] Xiaoliang Liu, Furao Shen, Jian Zhao, and Changhai Nie. EAP: An effective black-box impersonation adversar-ial patch attack method on face recognition in the physical world. Neurocomputing , 580:127517, 2024. 12 [17] Yingzi Ma, Yulong Cao, Jiachen Sun, Marco Pavone, and Chaowei Xiao. Dolphins: Multimodal language model for driving. In ECCV , 2024. 3 [18] Aleksander Madry, Aleksandar Makelov, Ludwig Schmidt, Dimitris Tsipras, and Adrian Vladu. Towards deep learning models resistant to adversarial attacks. In ICLR , 2018. 1, 11 [19] Xiangyu Qi, Kaixuan Huang, Ashwinee Panda, Peter Hen-derson, Mengdi Wang, and Prateek Mittal. Visual adversarial examples jailbreak aligned large language models. In AAAI ,2024. 2, 8, 9 [20] Alec Radford, Jong Wook Kim, Chris Hallacy, Aditya Ramesh, Gabriel Goh, Sandhini Agarwal, Girish Sastry, Amanda Askell, Pamela Mishkin, Jack Clark, Gretchen Krueger, and Ilya Sutskever. Learning transferable visual models from natural language supervision. In ICML , 2021. 1, 15 [21] Erfan Shayegani, Yue Dong, and Nael Abu-Ghazaleh. Jail-break in pieces: Compositional adversarial attacks on multi-modal language models. In ICLR , 2024. 8, 9 [22] Chonghao Sima, Katrin Renz, Kashyap Chitta, Li Chen, Hanxue Zhang, Chengen Xie, Ping Luo, Andreas Geiger, and Hongyang Li. DriveLM: Driving with graph visual ques-tion answering. In ECCV , 2024. 1, 2, 3, 8, 11, 15 [23] Kunyu Wang, Xuanran He, Wenxuan Wang, and Xiaosen Wang. Boosting adversarial transferability by block shuffle and rotation. In CVPR , pages 24336–24346, 2024. 5, 14 [24] Cihang Xie, Zhishuai Zhang, Yuyin Zhou, Song Bai, Jianyu Wang, Zhou Ren, and Alan L. Yuille. Improving transferabil-ity of adversarial examples with input diversity. In CVPR ,2019. 5, 9 [25] Peng Xie, Yequan Bie, Jianda Mao, Yangqiu Song, Yang Wang, Hao Chen, and Kani Chen. Chain of attack: On the robustness of vision-language models against transfer-based adversarial attacks. In CVPR , 2025. 8, 9 [26] Mang Ye, Xuankun Rong, Wenke Huang, Bo Du, Nenghai Yu, and Dacheng Tao. A survey of safety on large vision-language models: Attacks, defenses and evaluations. arXiv preprint arXiv:2502.14881 , 2025. 2, 8 [27] Ziyi Yin, Muchao Ye, Tianrong Zhang, Tianyu Du, Jin-guo Zhu, Han Liu, Jinghui Chen, Ting Wang, and Fenglong Ma. VLATTACK: Multimodal adversarial attacks on vision-language tasks via pre-trained models. In NeurIPS , 2023. 2, 8, 9 [28] Tianhe Yu, Saurabh Kumar, Abhishek Gupta, Sergey Levine, Karol Hausman, and Chelsea Finn. Gradient surgery for multi-task learning. In NeurIPS , 2020. 9 [29] Jiaming Zhang, Junhong Ye, Xingjun Ma, Yige Li, Yunfan Yang, Yunhao Chen, Jitao Sang, and Dit-Yan Yeung. Anyat-tack: Towards large-scale self-supervised adversarial attacks on vision-language models. In CVPR , 2025. 15 [30] Tianyuan Zhang, Lu Wang, Xinwei Zhang, Yitong Zhang, Boyi Jia, Siyuan Liang, Shengshan Hu, Qiang Fu, Aishan Liu, and Xianglong Liu. Visual adversarial attack on vision-language models for autonomous driving. Machine Intelli-gence Research , pages 1–18, 2026. 2, 15 [31] Yunqing Zhao, Tianyu Pang, Chao Du, Xiao Yang, Chongx-uan Li, Ngai-Man Cheung, and Min Lin. On evaluating adversarial robustness of large vision-language models. In 

NeurIPS , 2023. 2 [32] Yunqing Zhao, Tianyu Pang, Chao Du, Xiao Yang, Chongx-uan Li, Ngai-Man Cheung, and Min Lin. On the adversarial robustness of vision-language models. In IEEE/CVF Con-ference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition Work-shops (CVPRW) , 2024. 9 [33] Andy Zou, Zifan Wang, J. Zico Kolter, and Matt Fredrikson. Universal and transferable adversarial attacks on aligned lan-guage models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2307.15043 , 2023. 8