Title: Warm-Start Flow Matching for Guaranteed Fast Text/Image Generation

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2603.19360v1

Published Time: Mon, 23 Mar 2026 00:08:16 GMT

Number of Pages: 14

Markdown Content:
## Warm-Start Flow Matching for Guaranteed Fast Text/Image Generation 

Minyoung Kim 1

Abstract 

Current auto-regressive (AR) LLMs, diffusion-based text/image generative models, and recent flow matching (FM) algorithms are capable of generating premium quality text/image samples. However, the inference or sample generation in these models is often very time-consuming and computationally demanding, mainly due to large numbers of function evaluations corresponding to the lengths of tokens or the numbers of dif-fusion steps. This also necessitates heavy GPU resources, time, and electricity. In this work we propose a novel solution to reduce the sample generation time of flow matching algorithms by a guaranteed speed-up factor, without sacrificing the quality of the generated samples. Our key idea is to utilize computationally lightweight gen-erative models whose generation time is negligi-ble compared to that of the target AR/FM mod-els. The draft samples from a lightweight model, whose quality is not satisfactory but fast to gen-erate, are regarded as an initial distribution for a FM algorithm. Unlike conventional usage of FM that takes a pure noise (e.g., Gaussian or uniform) initial distribution, the draft samples are already of decent quality, so we can set the starting time to be closer to the end time rather than 0 in the pure noise FM case. This will significantly reduce the number of time steps to reach the target data distribution, and the speed-up factor is guaranteed. Our idea, dubbed Warm-Start FM or WS-FM, can essentially be seen as a learning-to-refine gen-erative model from low-quality draft samples to high-quality samples. As a proof of concept, we demonstrate the idea on some synthetic toy data as well as real-world text and image generation tasks, illustrating that our idea offers guaranteed speed-up in sample generation without sacrificing the quality of the generated samples. 

> 1Samsung AI Center Cambridge, United Kingdom. Correspon-dence to: Minyoung Kim <mikim21@gmail.com>.
> Preprint.

1. Introduction 

In this paper we deal with generative models for domains such as natural language texts or images. Despite plethora of recent literature on deep generative models, most no-tably auto-regressive (AR) LLMs and diffusion generative models, we particularly focus on the flow matching (FM) methods (Lipman et al., 2023a;b; Kim, 2025; Gat et al., 2024; Campbell et al., 2024). Our goal is to have a guar-anteed speed-up factor for sample generation compared to existing FM methods without sacrificing the sample quality. Given two distributions whose samples are accessible, FM aims to learn a generator (either in the form of diffusion or continuous-time Markov chain) that transports one distribu-tion to the other. Most FM models deal with pure noise (e.g., Gaussian white noise or uniform) as the initial distribution and the data samples that we aims to mimic as the target distribution. The generation of samples from FM models often requires many function evaluations or time steps to en-able accurate transportation from noise to data, leading to a time-consuming and computationally demanding generation (inference) stage. Our key insight is that this slow generation or a large num-ber of time steps originates from too naive initial distribu-tion that has zero information about the target distribution. Since we already have access to the target data samples, we can first train some computationally lightweight generative models (e.g., small LSTM networks or GAN models). The generation time for these lightweight models is negligible compared to that of the target FM models. Our main idea is that the draft samples from a lightweight model, whose qual-ity is not satisfactory but fast to generate, are then regarded as an initial distribution for a FM algorithm. Unlike conven-tional usage of FM that takes a pure noise initial distribution, the draft samples are already of decent quality, so we can set the starting time to be closer to the end time rather than 0 in the pure noise FM case. This will significantly reduce the number of time steps to reach the target data distribution, and even further the speed-up factor is guaranteed. Our idea, dubbed Warm-Start FM or WS-FM, can essentially be seen as a learning-to-refine generative model from low-quality draft samples to high quality samples. Following the conventions in diffusion models and flow matching algorithms, we let P1(x) be the target data dis-1

> arXiv:2603.19360v1 [cs.LG] 19 Mar 2026

Warm-Start Flow Matching for Guaranteed Fast Text/Image Generation Lightweight model 

(eg, LSTM, GAN) 

Training pipeline 

> Training Data
> “D1”
> Images/Texts

Step-1: Train the lightweight model with “D1” 

Flow Matching model 

(velocity network) 

> Paired Data
> “D2”

(x t0 , x 1)

Step-2: Collect paired data “D2” 

using Refinement strategy 

> Refinement Strategy
> (eg, Nearest neighbor
> or Teacher model)

xt0 

x1

Step-3: Train FM model with paired data “D2” 

> Operations performed on HP GPU servers

xt0 

x1 = Nearest neighbor of xt0 in D1  

> Generate
> Prompt to teacher model: “Refine

xt0 to output x1”

or Lightweight model 

(eg, LSTM, GAN) 

Step-1: Generate draft samples 

Step-2: Run FM steps N*(1-t0) times 

xt0 

Inference pipeline 

> Operations performed on user device

User request 

> Fewer steps than original FM’s N steps

Flow Matching model 

(velocity network) 

# ……

Xt0+h  Xt0+2h  X1

Model output 

N*(1-t0) time steps 

> Takes negligible time
> Overall speed-up = 1/(1-t0)

Figure 1. Training and inference pipelines for our warm-start flow matching method. 

tribution, and P0(x) be the pure noise distribution (e.g., Gaussian white noise for continuous domain and uniform or mask-delta 1 distributions for discrete domain). Concep-tually the flow matching (FM) algorithms (Lipman et al., 2023a; Albergo & Vanden-Eijnden, 2023; Kim, 2025) re-gard P0 as the initial distribution at time t = 0 , and P1 as the destination distribution at time t = 1 , and consider in-terpolation xt at t ∈ [0 , 1] between two end points x0 ∼ P0

and x1 ∼ P1. The simplest form is the linear interpolation: 

xt = tx 1 + (1 − t)x0 in the state space (e.g., in continuous 

> 1

In many discrete flow matching and diffusion models, e.g. (Gat et al., 2024; Campbell et al., 2024), P0(x) = δmask (x) is often used where mask is a special state apart from normal states. 

domain) or xt ∼ tP 1(x) + (1 − t)P0(x) in the probability space (e.g., in discrete domain). This interpolation naturally forms a velocity vector field via time derivatives, and the FM training amounts to learning the velocity field via a neu-ral network u(t, x t). Once trained, the learned velocity field dictates the transportation from P0 to P1, thereby generating samples from P1.Although diffusion generative models (Sohl-Dickstein et al., 2015; Ho et al., 2020; Song et al., 2021) are relatively more popular, there are two main reasons why we opt for FM in our work. First, diffusion models aim to revert a noising process, and the score estimation required in the reverse process is often more difficult to learn than velocity learning 2Warm-Start Flow Matching for Guaranteed Fast Text/Image Generation 

in FM. Secondly, since diffusion models rely on the noising process to convert the data distribution to pure noise, the resulting end distribution that serves as an initial distribution for generation, is quite restricted to a specific noise distri-bution (e.g., Gaussian white noise or the mask-delta). On the other hand, FM has more freedom in choosing the initial distribution. FM is more attractive in this regard, but conventional prac-tice in FM incurs some other issues. First, the sample gen-eration with FM usually takes long due to many time steps or function (neural network) evaluations for accurate trans-portation. Secondly, the pairing (or coupling) between P0

and P1 for interpolation is usually inefficient – In practice the independent pairing Q(x0, x 1) = P0(x0) · P1(x1) is often used. For high state dimensionality, however, such an independent coupling can makes the velocity estimation highly inefficient, which makes FM training difficult. Some more informative pairing can make the training more ef-ficient (Shi et al., 2023; Kim, 2025), however, coming up with an effective non-independent pairing is often difficult in practice. 

2. Background on Discrete Flow Matching 

Even though our idea can be straightforwardly applied to continuous-state flow matching algorithms, we focus on dis-crete flow matching in our paper due to its wide applicability to both language and vision domains. This section reviews some technical background on discrete flow matching. For notations, we let x = ( x1, . . . , x N ) be the state that con-sists of N tokens, each of which takes a value from [V ] (i.e., 

xi ∈ { 1, . . . , V }). We build a diffusion generative model in the continuous time t ∈ [0 , 1] , and xt = ( x1 

> t

, . . . , x Nt )

represents the state at time t. We denote by P1(x) the data distribution that we aim to learn where the subscript 1

comes from the convention where the model distribution of terminal state x1 is supposed to match the target distribu-tion. Accordingly the initial distribution is denoted as P0(x)

which is typically a pure noise distribution (e.g., uniform over [V ]N or a delta function at a special token, often called the mask token, in which case we extend [V ] to include it). Discrete flow models (Campbell et al., 2024; Gat et al., 2024) deal with the continuous-time Markov chain (CTMC) model, and we denote the kernel for the i-th token by 

uit(xt, x it+h), where the probability of xit+h is given as: 

δxit(·) + hu it(xt, ·) (1) where h is small positive, ideally infinitesimal. For the full distribution for xt+h over N tokens, we assume token-wise independence that is adopted by most discrete generative models to circumvent exponentially many configurations, otherwise computationally infeasible. The discrete flow matching (DFM) (Campbell et al., 2024; Gat et al., 2024) conforms to the general flow matching framework (e.g., see (Lipman et al., 2023b) or the uni-fied bridge framework described in (Kim, 2025)). The main idea, regardless of continuous or discrete state space, is to come up with the so called coupling distribution 

Q(x0, x 1) and pinned marginals Pt(xt|x0, x 1) and its gen-erators ut(xt, ·| x0, x 1) which are also pinned at x0 and x1.Once these pinned marginal generators are learned, one can have (unconditional) generators ut(xt, ·) that are proven to produce samples that follow the marginal distributions 

Pt(xt) that are induced from Q(x0, x 1) and Pt(xt|x0, x 1).Hence, if the coupling Q satisfies the marginal constraint 

Q(x1) = P1(x1), then we can guarantee that the samples 

x1 from the generator ut(xt, ·) follow the target P1.We mainly follow the derivations in (Gat et al., 2024), and specifically, we adopt the pinned generators 

uit(xt, ·| x0, x 1) = 

> J

X

> j=1

ai,j t wi,j (·| x0, x 1) + bitδxit (·) (2) where ai,j t = ... , bit = ... , and {κi,j t }Jj=1 forms convex combinations (i.e., non-negative and summed to 1). It can be shown that we then have the pinned marginals, 

P it (xit|x0, x 1) = 

> J

X

> j=1

κi,j t wi,j (xit|x0, x 1) (3) Typical choices for the distributions wi,j (xit|x0, x 1) are sim-ple delta functions, e.g., δxi 

> 0

(·) and δxi 

> 1

(·), or the uniform distribution. By defining the marginals as 

Pt(x) = X

> x0,x 1

Q(x0, x 1)Pt(xt|x0, x 1) (4) and recall that Pt(xt|x0, x 1) is defined as the product of (3) from the token-wise independence assumption. From the flow matching principle (Lipman et al., 2023b; Kim, 2025), the unconditional generator defined as 

uit(xt, ·) = 1

Pt(xt) EQ[uit(xt, ·| x0, x 1)Pt(xt|x0, x 1)] (5) admits Pt(xt) as its marginal distributions. However, since it is generally not tractable to compute (5) due to the difficult marginalization, we instead estimate it with a neural network by optimizing the following: 

min  

> θ

−X

> i,j

Et,x 0,x 1 Ewi,j (c|x0,x 1)[log vθ (t, x t)i,j,c ] (6) where vθ (t, x t) is the neural network approximator that outputs (N × J × V ) tensor, and the first expectation is with respect to the uniform over t ∈ [0 , 1] , Q(x0, x 1), and 3Warm-Start Flow Matching for Guaranteed Fast Text/Image Generation 

Pt(xt|x0, x 1). At the sampling time, we generate samples from the model using 

uit(xt, ·) = 

> J

X

> j=1

ai,j t vθ (t, x t)i,j + bitδxit (·) (7) 

3. Our Method 

We aim to address the above-mentioned two issues that appear in the conventional FM practice. First, for the initial distribution of FM, instead of pure noise, we adopt a lightweight fast generative models such as small-sized LSTM (Hochreiter & Schmidhuber, 1997) for discrete sequences or GAN (Radford et al., 2015) for images that is trained on the data samples. Since the samples from such a lightweight model are already closer to the target P1(x)

than pure noise, we can set the start time in the flow match-ing (denoted by t0) to be closer to final time t = 1 , e.g., 

t0 = 0 .8, instead of original FM’s t0 = 0 . The (initial) dis-tribution of the samples generated by the lightweight model is denoted as Pt0 (x), and we build a FM bridge between 

Pt0 at t = t0 and P1 at t = 1 . We call this idea Warm-Start Flow Matching (WS-FM) contrast to original FM’s cold start initial. Since sample generation from Pt0 (x) is negligi-bly fast, the number of WS-FM time steps is guaranteed to be reduced from N to N · (1 − t0) where N is the time steps required in the original FM. The speed-up in data generation is then 1/(1 − t0) (e.g., ×5 speed-up if we use t0 = 0 .8). The hyperparameter t0 in our WS-FM is chosen empirically by seeking for the largest t0 that does not degrade the final sample quality. Secondly, for more efficient pairing beyond the conventional independent pairing, we employ the concept of refinement :an initial sample xt0 ∼ Pt0 (x) is refined to a sample x1 so that x1 (approximately) follows P1(x). To exemplify it in the English text generation cases where P1(x) represents the set of natural English texts, we may use off-the-shelf LLMs for refinement. For a draft text xt0 ∼ Pt0 (x), for instance, we ask LLMs to respond with the following prompt: 

“Refine the input text ${ xt0 } so that it becomes a more natural and grammatically correct English text, but not too different from the input text.” 

Alternatively, especially in the non-text domains or if strong foundation models like LLMs are not available, the refine-ment of xt0 can be done by finding the nearest neighbors of 

xt0 in the dataset of P1(x). We indeed use this strategy in our image generation experiments. Formally, the refinement can be viewed as having a cou-pling distribution Q(xt0 , x 1) = Pt0 (xt0 )·Pref ine (x1|xt0 ) 2

> 2

In theory, the flow matching requires the coupling Q(xt0 , x 1)

Figure 2. Training algorithm comparison between DFM (Gat et al., 2024) (LEFT) and our WS-DFM (RIGHT). Changes shown as red. 

Figure 3. Inference algorithm comparison between DFM (Gat et al., 2024) (LEFT) and our WS-DFM (RIGHT). Changes as red. 

where Pref ine is one of the mapping/refinement strategies that we discussed. We collect paired samples (xt0 , x 1)

from Q(xt0 , x 1), and they serve as training data for FM training. During training the interpolation is confined to 

t ∈ [t0, 1] where the linear interpolation takes the form 

xt = 1−t 

> 1−t0

xt0 + tx 1. Training amounts to minimizing discrepancy between u(t, x t) and the velocity at xt. At the inference stage, we can use the learned velocity field u(t, x t)

starting from t = t0 to gradually transport Pt0 to P1. As an inverse operation for our modified interpolation, the ve-locity time-warping may be needed: u ← 1−t0 

> 1−t

u during generation steps. We visualize the overall training and inference pipelines for our WS-FM in Fig 1. For the specific discrete-domain DFM (Gat et al., 2024), we differentiate algorithms (pseu-docodes) between DFM and our WS-DFM in Fig. 2 (train-ing) and Fig. 3 (inference/generation) where we highlight the main changes. 

4. Experiments 

For the proof-of-concept empirical verification of the pro-posed idea, we demonstrate several experimental results. For our experiments we predominantly focus on discrete flow matching (DFM) algorithms (Gat et al., 2024; Camp-bell et al., 2024) which are advantageous over the continu-

satisfies the boundary marginal constraints, namely Q(xt0 ) = 

Pt0 (xt0 ) and Q(x1) = P1(x1). The former is easily met by construction, while the latter is often not strictly satisfied. As a remedy, we may modify Pref ine (x1|xt0 ) as a mixture of P1(x1)

and the refinement mapping, which can be done by randomly injecting x1 ∼ P1(x1) samples to the paired data, as we did in our experiments in Sec. 4.3. 

4Warm-Start Flow Matching for Guaranteed Fast Text/Image Generation 

(a) (b) (c) (d) (e) 

Figure 4. (Two moons) (a) Target distribution P1(x). (b) Pure uniform noise distribution P0(x) used in DFM (Gat et al., 2024). (c–e) Three lightweight draft models adopted in our WS-DFM: (c) = pretty good, (d) = fair, (e) = poor. 

Table 1. (Two moons) Sample generation results. The symmetric KL (SKL) divergences between generated and true samples, and the number of function evaluations (NFE) are shown. In our WS-DFM, those cases where the sample quality is no worse than original DFM are marked as ✔.                                    

> t0SKL ( ↓)NFE ( ↓)Original DFM (Gat et al., 2024) 00.62 20 WS-DFM +Pretty good draft model 0.95 0.74 ✘10.9 0.54 ✔20.8 0.37 ✔4WS-DFM +Fair draft model 0.8 0.86 ✘40.5 0.51 ✔10 WS-DFM +Poor draft model 0.8 1.35 ✘40.5 0.64 ✘10 0.35 0.54 ✔13

ous counterparts in that the text/language data can be easily handled. We denote by P1(x) the data distribution, and the initial distribution is denoted as P0(x) which is typically a pure noise distribution (e.g., uniform over [V ]N or a delta function at a special token, often called the mask token, in which case we extend [V ] to include it). Unlike this original treatment, we have the initial distribution of draft samples 

xt0 ∼ Pt0 (xt0 ) drawn from a small lightweight generative model, where t0 ≫ 0 (e.g., t0 = 0 .5 or 0.8) is chosen empirically. 

4.1. (Synthetic) Two Moons 

We first consider the 2D synthetic two moons dataset. The state x = ( x1, x 2) is a point in the 2D integer grid x ∈{1, 2, . . . , 128 } × { 1, 2, . . . , 128 }. Thus x is a sequence of length N = 2 tokens where each token xi takes one of the V = 128 values (vocabulary size 128). The true data distribution P1(x) is visualized in Fig. 4(a). The original DFM (Gat et al., 2024) starts from the pure noise uniform distribution P0(x) shown in Fig. 4(b). For the velocity network u(t, x ), a 4-layer MLP with hidden dimension h =128 is used, where x = ( x1, x 2) is first converted to the embedding ϕ(x) ∈ R2h by applying a table mapping [V ] →

Rh (aka nn.Embedding in PyTorch) for each xi followed by concatenation, and ϕ(x) is fed into the MLP as input. We use the time step size 0.05 that amounts to 20 time steps for sample generation. The snapshots of generation steps from the trained original DFM are shown in Fig. 5(a). In our warm-start DFM (WS-DFM), we consider three dif-ferent lightweight draft models that are artificially contrived depending on the quality or closeness to the target distribu-tion. The pretty good draft model (Fig. 4(c)) is the closest to the target among others, the fair model (Fig. 4(d)) contains more noise, and the poor model (Fig. 4(e)) is the farthest from the target and the most noisy. To form the paired training data, we use the nearest neighbor refinement map-ping strategy. Table 1 summarizes the results for different starting times t0 where we report the symmetric KL (SKL) divergences between the true distribution and the generated samples. For each of the three draft models, the largest t0

that achieves high quality generated samples, determined by the SKL metric that is no worse than that of the orig-inal DFM, is marked, and also visualized in Fig. 5(b–d). As shown our WS-DFM can generate samples no worse than DFM’s in quality, but with significant speed-up factors (×10 , ×2, and ×1.5) depending on the draft model’s per-formance. As expected, the starting time t0 that ensures no quality degradation heavily depends on the sample quality of the draft model: A worse draft model requires more time steps whereas a better draft model takes fewer time steps. 

4.2. Natural Language Text Generation 

In this section we consider two natural English text data dis-tributions supplied by the Text-8 and Wikitext-103 

datasets. 4.2.1. T EXT -8 Similar to the settings used in the previous discrete flow matching (Campbell et al., 2024) and discrete diffusion mod-els (Austin et al., 2021), we consider a character-level text generation task using the Text-8 dataset (Mahoney, 2006). The dataset is comprised of 100MB of text from English Wikipedia. Considering only lowercase alphabet letters and the space character, the vocabulary size is 27. Following the standard protocol, we form sequences of length 256 tokens (characters). We employ the small Transformer-based DFM generator network 3 used in (Gat et al., 2024), which takes up about 90M parameters in our case. As a baseline we train the DFM model (Gat et al., 2024) (with the same generator network architecture for fair com-parison) up to 300K iterations with batch size 512, learn-ing rate 0.0003, and AMSGrad (Reddi et al., 2018). The model was trained on 4 NVIDIA A40 GPUs. As a draft model for initial samples in our WS-DFM, we adopt the LSTM (Hochreiter & Schmidhuber, 1997) with 2 layers, each with 512 hidden units, which takes up about 4.2M parameters. For the refinement strategy for data pairing, we use the Gemma3 27B LLM (Team, 2025) with the Ollama 

> 3

Specifically, this is the DiT architecture (Peebles & Xie, 2022) with 12 layers, 12 attention heads, and hidden dimensionality 768. 

5Warm-Start Flow Matching for Guaranteed Fast Text/Image Generation 

Figure 5. (Two moons) (a) Generation steps in the original DFM (Gat et al., 2024) with step size 0.05 ( NFE = 20 steps). Only every other time steps are shown. (b–d) Our WS-DFM results for three different lightweight draft models: (b) = pretty good, (c) = fair, (d) = poor. Our WS-DFM models achieve sample quality no worse than DFM’s, but with significant speed-up in sample generation ( ×10 , ×2, and ×1.5

depending on the draft model’s performance). 

tool 4 where for each LSTM sample draft_text we give the LLM the prompt like: Refine the following text so that it looks more natural and grammatically correct in English. The number of characters of the output needs to be slightly greater than that of the input text, and the result should only contain lowercase English letters or the space character only. Please just output the answer, not any explanation or any other text: ${draft_text}. We then collect 256K pairs of draft text and LLM-refined text as a training set for the WS-DFM. Our training starts from the trained DFM network where we try two settings: t0 = 0 .8 (×5 speed-up) and t0 = 0 .5 (×2). As we fine-tune DFM’s network, we use small learning rate 3 × 10 −6 with 1000 iterations. For evaluation, we follow the LLM-based evaluation method used in (Campbell et al., 2024): A much larger text model, say, GPT-J-6B (Wang & Komatsuzaki, 2021), serves as a proxy true model to evaluate the next-token negative log-likelihood (NLL) score of the generated samples. We also report the entropy of model’s next-token prediction proba-bility to take into account the diversity in generated text. We generate 512 sentences for evaluation, and take 1024 time steps (NFEs) for DFM. Our WS-DFM thus takes 512 or 205 NFEs accordingly for t0 = 0 .5 and t0 = 0 .8, respectively. The results are summarized in Table 2. First, LSTM text generation is very fast and the generation time is almost negligible. Accordingly, our theoretical anticipation of the speed-up of WS-DFM in generation is almost well reflected in practice. Despite these ×5 and ×2 speed-up factors, our WS-DFM achieve comparable or better generation quality 

> 4

https://github.com/ollama/ollama 

Table 2. (Text-8) Text generation results. The NLL scores mea-sured by GPT-J-6B LLM, the entropy in next token prediction, and the per-sentence generation time (in seconds) are shown.                    

> NLL ( ↓)Entropy ( ↑)Time ( ↓)LSTM 6.87 7.19 Negligible Original DFM (Gat et al., 2024) 6.58 7.14 6.56 Our WS-DFM ( t0= 0 .8)6.54 7.11 1.36 Our WS-DFM ( t0= 0 .5)6.48 7.05 3.36 Refined by Gemma3 27B 6.54 7.18 −

(in NLL scores) than the original DFM at almost the same entropy level. It is also surprising that WS-DFM is better than the oracle Gemma3 27B model used to generate train-ing pairs for WS-DFM. Evidently our WS-DFM effectively learns to refine low-quality initial samples from the fast LSTM draft model where the improvement in NLL score is huge. We also show some sample texts generated by DFM, LSTM, and our WS-DFM in Fig. 10. 4.2.2. W IKITEXT -103 Next we test our WS-DFM model on the larger Wikitext-103 dataset 5 (Merity et al., 2016), a collection of verified English articles on Wikipedia that contain over 100 million tokens where we use the GPT-2 tokenizer 6 (Radford et al., 2019). We consider a larger sentence length of 1024 tokens 

> 5

https://huggingface.co/datasets/ Salesforce/wikitext 

> 6

https://huggingface.co/docs/ transformers/en/model_doc/gpt2 

6Warm-Start Flow Matching for Guaranteed Fast Text/Image Generation                     

> Table 3. (Wikitext-103) Text generation results. Perplexity scores are measured by GPT-J-6B LLM, and per-sentence generation time (in seconds) is also shown.
> Perplexity ( ↓)Entropy ( ↑)Time ( ↓)LSTM 171.23 7.56 Negligible Original DFM (Gat et al., 2024) 69.06 7.42 8.33 Our WS-DFM ( t0= 0 .8)67.86 7.19 1.70 Our WS-DFM ( t0= 0 .5)64.68 7.16 4.20 Refined by Gemma3 27B 32.88 7.14 −

for this experiment. The baseline DFM takes the same generator network archi-tecture as in Sec. 4.2.1, which now takes up 170M parame-ters due to the large vocabulary size. We train the model on 2 H100 GPUs. For the draft model we use the LSTM with 1 layer of 1024 hidden units with takes up 111.4M parameters (majority of them constitute the token embedding module, not the main part of LSTM). Once trained, generating sen-tences from the LSTM is very fast, the generation time being nearly negligible compared to DFM. To form the training pairs for our WS-DFM, we generate 256K sentences from the trained LSTM, then refine each sentence in the exactly the same manner as Sec. 4.2.1, using the Gemma3 27B LLM. Then we train our WS-DFM in two different starting times: t0 = 0 .8 (×5 speed-up) and t0 = 0 .5 (×2 speed-up). The training protocol is nearly identical to that in the previous section. The evaluation protocol is the same as before where we use the GPT-J-6B to measure the perplexity score of the generated sentences. The results are summarized in Table. 3. Again, our WS-DFM models achieve guaranteed speed-up in text generation over the original DFM model with even better perplexity scores implying that the generation quality is never degraded. However, the perplexity scores of our models are still behind the auto-regressive LLM Gemma3 27B, which might be attributed to the relatively small num-ber of training pairs used to train the models. However, we emphasize here that our simple idea of warm-start draft refinement demonstrates significant improvement in text generation time without affecting the sample quality. See Fig. 14 for some example texts generated by the models. 

4.3. Image Generation 

Lastly, we apply our WS-DFM to image generation tasks. Even though image generation has been predominantly dealt with by continuous-state diffusion models or con-tinuous flow matching algorithms, we attempt to tackle it using discrete-space models. An image can be seen as a sequence of discrete-valued tokens by quantizing inten-sity value of each pixel. For instance, 8-bit quantization yields vocabulary size 256. Another thing is the ordering of pixels into a sequence where one can consider typical row/column/channel-wise rasterization schemes. Unlike most auto-regressive models for the rasterized pixels (e.g., PixelCNN (Salimans et al., 2017)) whose performance heav-ily relies on the rasterization ordering, the DFM models are not affected by the pixel ordering. This is because the model does not impose any modeling assumptions on the proximity of pixels or conditioning. We take the CIFAR-10 dataset, and consider two experi-mental settings: gray-scale images of resolution (32 × 32) 

turned into sequences of 1024 tokens, and color images of shape (32 × 32 × 3) turned into sequences of 3072 tokens. Using 8-bit encoding, each token takes 256 distinct values (vocabulary size 256). For the baseline original DFM, we adopt the same generator architecture as text data cases, and train it for up to 1 million iterations with learning rate 0.0003 where we use the model checkpoint with the best validation performance, which occurred at 728K iterations. For both gray-scale and color images, we train the model on two H100 GPUs. For the fast-generating draft network in our WS-DFM, we use the DC-GAN (Radford et al., 2015) model, that gen-erates images in nearly negligible time compared to DFM. The DC-GAN model is trained to generate color images, and we convert them into gray-scale images for the gray-scale generation experiment. We then prepare training pairs for WS-DFM training as follows. For each of 50K images generated by the DC-GAN model, we find the k-nearest neighbors in the CIFAR-10 training set where the distance between images is measured as Euclidean distance in the pixel space. See Fig. 11 for some example k-nearest sam-ples. Since this process may not fully represent the data distribution, we additionally inject randomly selected k′

images from data as additional refined images. We use 

k = k′ = 5 for in all settings. This way, we have 10 pairs for each DC-GAN generated image, forming 500K training pairs. We deal with three models with starting time t0 = 0 .5

(×2 speed-up), t0 = 0 .65 (×3), and t0 = 0 .5 (×5). Our WS-DFM models are trained up to 15K iterations with learn-ing rate 0.0003 where we take the model checkpoints that yield the best validation performance. The number of time steps is 1024 for DFM and our WS-DFM. The FID scores measured with 50K samples and the genera-tion wall-clock times are summarized in Table 4. In most scenarios, our WS-DFM results in comparable or even better generation performance against original (cold-start) DFM, with significantly reduced generation time. The refinement process done by our WS-DFM indeed improves the qual-ity of generated samples significantly from the small draft samples. We visualize some generated images in Fig. 6 7.

> 7Results on colored data can be found in Fig. 8. More images from our WS-DFM are shown in Fig. 12 (gray) and Fig. 13 (color).

7Warm-Start Flow Matching for Guaranteed Fast Text/Image Generation 

(a) Data (b) DFM (c) DC-GAN (d) WS-DFM ( t0 = 0 .8) (e) WS-DFM ( t0 = 0 .5)

Figure 6. (CIFAR-10 Gray-scale) Some image samples generated by the competing methods. 

Figure 7. (CIFAR-10 Gray-scale) Progress in sample generation in our WS-DFM with t0 = 0 .5. The left most column contains images generated by the lightweight DC-GAN model, which are progressively refined by our WS-DFM, and the rightmost column shows the finaloutput images of our WS-DFM. 

Table 4. (CIFAR-10) Image generation results. The FID score and the per-image generation time (in seconds) are shown.                            

> Gray-scale Color FID ( ↓)Time ( ↓)FID ( ↓)Time ( ↓)DC-GAN 74.64 Negligible 80.91 Negligible Original DFM 30.46 0.62 36.91 2.64 WS-DFM ( t0= 0 .8)23.59 0.13 37.02 0.55 WS-DFM ( t0= 0 .65 )22.75 0.23 36.47 0.94 WS-DFM ( t0= 0 .5)19.47 0.32 34.65 1.34

We also illustrate the progress in sample generation in Fig 7, showing how the low-quality DC-GAN images are refined to the high-quality outputs by our WS-DFM (See Fig. 9 for colored data results). 

5. Conclusion 

We have proposed a new idea of warm-start flow matching that can boost the inference/generation speed of flow match-ing algorithms significantly with a guaranteed speed-up factor. By utilizing computationally lightweight generative models, we regard their draft samples as an initial distribu-tion for a FM algorithm, which allows us to set the starting time in generation to be closer to the end time, significantly reducing the number of time steps to reach the target data distribution. Not only the speed-up factor is guaranteed, the sample quality is not sacrificed compared to original FM models. On several synthetic, text, image benchmarks we have verified the validity of the proposed idea, achiev-ing guaranteed speed-up in sample generation time without losing sample quality. Potential applications for our method are abundant. Some candidate list below shows possible use cases. 1. Significantly reducing the LLM chatbot response la-tency with fast draft models. We can use either a small LM or an LSTM for initial text sample generation, then refine the drafts using our WS-FM. The quality is not degraded, and we have a guaranteed speed-up factor due to the reduced number of time steps in generation. 2. Boosting the speed of image generation or manipula-tion (eg, image editing or adding effects). By using fast and small image generation models (e.g., GAN or VQ-VAE), we first generate low quality images, then use our WS-FM (either discrete or continuous FM) to refine the draft samples to high-quality images. The quality is as good as that of the conventional FM or diffusion-based generative models. But unlike cold start from pure random noise in conventional FM, our WS-FM can generate similar quality images way faster by 2 to 5 speed-up factor. 3. Fast voice refinement or speech enhancement on smart-8Warm-Start Flow Matching for Guaranteed Fast Text/Image Generation 

phones. Our warm-start generation idea for vision and language can also be applied to the audio/speech do-main. We can expedite the voice conversion process, namely changing source speaker’s identity to match a target speaker while keeping the words exactly the same. We can also enable real-time speech enhance-ment where the process of removing background noise and digital artifacts can be possibly done real time using our warm-start flow matching technique. 

Impact Statement 

This paper presents work whose goal is to advance the field of Machine Learning. There are many potential societal consequences of our work, none of which we feel must be specifically highlighted here. 

References 

Albergo, M. S. and Vanden-Eijnden, E. Building Normal-izing Flows with Stochastic Interpolants, 2023. Interna-tional Conference on Learning Representations. Austin, J., Johnson, D. D., Ho, J., Tarlow, D., and Van Den Berg, R. Structured denoising diffusion models in discrete state-spaces, 2021. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems. Campbell, A., Yim, J., Barzilay, R., Rainforth, T., and Jaakkola, T. Generative Flows on Discrete State-Spaces: Enabling Multimodal Flows with Applications to Protein Co-Design, 2024. International Conference on Machine Learning. Gat, I., Remez, T., Shaul, N., Kreuk, F., Chen, R. T. Q., Synnaeve, G., Adi, Y., and Lipman, Y. Discrete Flow Matching, 2024. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems. Ho, J., Jain, A., and Abbeel, P. Denoising Diffusion Proba-bilistic Models, 2020. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems. Hochreiter, S. and Schmidhuber, J. Long short-term memory. 

Neural computation , 9(8):1735–1780, 1997. Kim, M. A Unified Framework for Diffusion Bridge Prob-lems: Flow Matching and Schrödinger Matching into One. In arXiv preprint , 2025. URL https://arxiv. org/abs/2503.21756 .Lipman, Y., Chen, R. T. Q., Ben-Hamu, H., Nickel, M., and Le, M. Flow matching for generative modeling, 2023a. International Conference on Learning Representations. Lipman, Y., Chen, R. T. Q., Ben-Hamu, H., Nickel, M., and Le, M. Flow Matching for Generative Modeling, 2023b. International Conference on Learning Representations. Mahoney, M. Large text compression benchmark. 2006. URL https://www.mattmahoney.net/ dc/text.html .Merity, S., Xiong, C., Bradbury, J., and Socher, R. Pointer sentinel mixture models, 2016. Peebles, W. and Xie, S. Scalable diffusion models with transformers. In arXiv preprint , 2022. URL https: //arxiv.org/abs/2212.09748 .Radford, A., Metz, L., and Chintala, S. Unsupervised Repre-sentation Learning with Deep Convolutional Generative Adversarial Networks. In arXiv preprint , 2015. URL 

https://arxiv.org/abs/1511.06434 .Radford, A., Wu, J., Child, R., Luan, D., Amodei, D., and Sutskever, I. Language models are unsupervised multitask learners. 2019. Reddi, S. J., Kale, S., and Kumar, S. On the Convergence of Adam and Beyond, 2018. International Conference on Learning Representations. Salimans, T., Karpathy, A., Chen, X., and Kingma, D. P. Pixelcnn++: A pixelcnn implementation with discretized logistic mixture likelihood and other modifications. In 

ICLR , 2017. Shi, Y., Bortoli, V. D., Campbell, A., and Doucet, A. Diffu-sion Schrödinger Bridge Matching, 2023. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems. Sohl-Dickstein, J., Weiss, E., Maheswaranathan, N., and Ganguli, S. Deep unsupervised learning using nonequi-librium thermodynamics, 2015. International Conference on Machine Learning. Song, J., Meng, C., and Ermon, S. Denoising Diffusion Im-plicit Models, 2021. International Conference on Learn-ing Representations. Team, G. Gemma 3 Technical Report. In arXiv preprint , 2025. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/ 2503.19786 .Wang, B. and Komatsuzaki, A. GPT-J-6B: A 6Billion Parameter Autoregressive Language Model. 2021. URL https://github.com/kingoflolz/ mesh-transformer-jax .9Warm-Start Flow Matching for Guaranteed Fast Text/Image Generation 

(a) Data (b) DFM (c) DC-GAN (d) WS-DFM ( t0 = 0 .8) (e) WS-DFM ( t0 = 0 .5)

Figure 8. (CIFAR-10 Color) Some image samples generated by the competing methods. 

Figure 9. (CIFAR-10 Color) Progress in sample generation in our WS-DFM with t0 = 0 .5. The left most column contains images generated by the lightweight DC-GAN model, which are progressively refined by our WS-DFM, and the rightmost column shows the finaloutput images of our WS-DFM. 1

(Sample 1) 

eight four zero s after world war ii computer histories participate in the departments of 

world war ii and in one nine four zero portugal besieged that japanese civil war before 

the retreat of rear tracescence era arrived a vendifamous colony in the thread 

(Sample 2) 

n glucose level this show the general condition of but it s necessary tending it to get it 

applicable and correctly in a missuggestive application for special activity such as the 

geals of glucose reduction of aspamine and others to active glattering altho 

(Sample 3) 

iny who possessed allodic heroes ia one three nine a although these stories previously a 

little wise written there is infamous fundamentalism and that a ringe or champstone 

stealo story by consistent white s head of a collective dialogue followed by a mark 

Original DFM 1

(Sample 1) 

rs great geometric short story criticism was composed by one eight one four two zero nb 

mentions for importunious beta influences of participants on october one seven one 

nine zero seven ted beckentris the church was discovered at a hereditary striking for 

(Sample 2) 

on gain rigs running of friendly objects therefore explained because until the one nine 

three zero s the geographies that developed irrewed for service he would be of charged 

carnot objects in the church in an expression of the lack of violation or travel 

(Sample 3) 

ion procedural museum has often been more proscrifed from tliffic this led to audiences 

furthermore the utmost of the world award from spain the province of the encyclopedia 

proclaimed the phase of transposing the costage to through the most notable functi 

LSTM 1

(Sample 1) 

aunch out of the ancient arabian peninsula and area the seven th anniversary of the 

earth in landing being golden his own land and orthernmost areas of northern states 

undangerous the euteme reviews is the property that dislikes his other life libex compon 

(Sample 2) 

s followed by the realms he served for re popularization notably nearly the value films in 

early one nine eight zero s furst initially funding he internationally represented a body of 

a flsoftball playing game titled a fulk television film country then ob 

(Sample 3) 

patriation free war the record recognizes mechanical studies such as ten thousand 

incorporated the fundamental theories of client of interests sports related links the so 

called psychoanalytic library it is opted around the found its smell of adolescents 

Our WS-DFM (t 0 = 0.8) 1

(Sample 1) 

as nearly built by the one nine three four s john doe has been disputed how much 

success demonstrated lightning without being charged to hear this music using the song 

video reference for clinton were a soggy country pronunciation and a speech generally 

ca 

(Sample 2) 

s or stated favorite for example menczened s peasants is the beautiful complete criticism 

of heses foster into which notable peralities head of large in a category of views one one 

three one one as generally a separate reason the philosopher important view 

(Sample 3) 

or species doctor after the success of the parents of andrew jackson and titler and 

michael nixon river of french move from one nine zero four to one nine two zero the 

alphabet for a one nine three nine randi shahman dressed with the yugoslavian 

revolution 

Our WS-DFM (t 0 = 0.5) 

Figure 10. (Text-8) Some text samples generated by the DFM (Gat et al., 2024), the LSTM draft model, and our WS-DFM models. 

10 Warm-Start Flow Matching for Guaranteed Fast Text/Image Generation 

Figure 11. (CIFAR-10) Examples of k-nearest neighbor samples from the refinement strategy in our WS-DFM for data pairing (xt0 , x 1).The top four panels are gray-scale data, and the bottom four panels colored data. For each panel, the leftmost column contains images generated by the lightweight DC-GAN models, and the next 5 columns show 5-nearest neighbor images retrieved from the training data. 

11 Warm-Start Flow Matching for Guaranteed Fast Text/Image Generation 

Figure 12. (CIFAR-10 Gray-scale) Sample images generated by WS-DFM t0 = 0 .8 (TOP) and t0 = 0 .5 (BOTTOM). 

12 Warm-Start Flow Matching for Guaranteed Fast Text/Image Generation 

Figure 13. (CIFAR-10 Color) Sample images generated by WS-DFM t0 = 0 .8 (TOP) and t0 = 0 .5 (BOTTOM). 

13 Warm-Start Flow Matching for Guaranteed Fast Text/Image Generation DFM generated 

under Contre-Admiral Pierre Jean-Baptiste Berton: the Madeira blockade of Negro Island in the East 

Indies was just at a disadvantage. His squadron, easily transported with the hastily formed Army of the 

French army under Rear-Admiral Durante Berton, as a small reinforcement of the army of 1,500 men 

under Brigadier-General (Alexadeton), leaving him with a detachment of highly capable soldiers. The 

arrival of Port Hope on the next morning, forcing the fort surrender after 2,000 men bombarded the 

Cape of Hope. The British prisoners were brought ashore and were taken there immediately. ==== Pulo 

Aura ==== By this stage, on 10 February Linois's squadron spotted the west-Pacifica line at Portsmouth, 

British Columbia, where he planned to draw them off with brig HMS London, under the command of 

Lieutenant Colonel Nathaniel Dance. Linois's instructions were to block the coast of Sumatra, avoiding a 

British opponent in mind and use continental forces from ~NN le Bourbon to Stavia in order to protect 

British shipping off the island. This island's freedom to comfortably navigate his ships and alongside the 

arrival of significant smaller warships and reinforcements to pursue convoys from the region, the British 

lost the aftermath of the capture of Port Louis on 18 February, Linois remained at Macau under Préepe. 

However, London was boosted of his success upon a return from the pre-existing campaign with his own 

forces and was joined uup the squadron at Liza. But the largest force encountered by the British, Linois 

had only a few of his valuable supplies, had already seized his ships for several weeks at Entiha Island, 

remaining from anchorages retaining the supplies. The effect of a major troop attack in the island in 

China, especially Pulo Aura, was reached at the end of September 1809 when previously engaged and 

captured by six warships and a single Dutch convoy from China. At around 10: 00 on 2 April a squadron 

formed itself up at Malacca and six British East Indiamen, Bombay, and four Australian corvises met. In 

the ensuing action the battle was fierce and the two warships throughout the day. The British admiral 

was able to surround the fleeing enfated by the British warships. When Linois returned to all his 

warships in the battle, Linois considered the ship too slow to chase the British West Indiamen and 

rowing back to ~Nle de France, and suffered no more damage. Many of theeir crews were brought 

ashore by Mark Chambers on Macau Town. As the British squadron approached, Nathaniel Dance's ship 

initially approached the French and agreed and replied at 15: 00 in a bay the French corvises opened 

fire and brought down rapidly. The British and French frigates then approached Lechre de la Brothers 

meeting resistance at 15: 45, and turned north towards the squadron a greater distance. Closing to flee, 

Linois recognised Tremendré, and the ships fired closee. But Linois responded: Lechre de la Brothers 

was cornered by Captain George Pasley and escaped. He was praised by both ships for the 

overwhelming numbers of French casualties were not genuine, but later news reached Chalacca on the 

Dutch coast. ==== Retreat from France ==== Aside from the food and supplies sent by the French line 

ships, and Linois's casualties, the engagement was delayed for two months and into 1809 until news of 

African East India reached the Warren's convoy departure and gave orders to recapture the British force 

back to Napoleon. A second British convoy had arrived from Macau in late February and was from ~Nle 

de Saint Louis, commanded by Captain Thomas Duckworth. Linois had the advantage by a brig under 

him HMS Active, who detected the message off Port Louis, sending his message into panic without a 

bearing and warning that it would be on fire and require months of truce. However, Linois was 

presented from ~No Bonaparte with tthe Knighthood, four times invested by the British Members of the 

Order of the Bath instead. By August a Dutch squadron, originally under Captain Engelbert Victor, had 

landed on the island along with a squadron of sick soldiers and corporal officers. Such were the 

reinforced British preparations that the large convoy of barges sent from the heavy West India ships of 

the French squadron landed at Port Louis on 30 August, led the convoy to the Pulo Aura, and delayed 

them back to Port Louis. The convoy faced similar difficulties, however, and the heavy British convoy 

returned late, also included the frigates Iphigant, Amazone and Elphinstone each, and a single squadron 

led by Rear-Admiral Sir John William Good Hope. Warren's squadron was returning to Macau and was 

joined by Préepe. On 3 March Napoleon engaged in an inconclusive engagement at the Battle of Pulo 

Aura, but the small port on 11 March had been overrun. On 9 May, the commander, Commodore 

Charrles LSTM generated 

Deutsche Heldred his son and successor, William S. Rawten, the year later joined Modoc. In 1931 he 

purchased a deal worth £ 107,000, making him the first female member in the history of the United 

States. He was a popular proprietor of a Southern League group in both the league and his new 2008 

post-World War II United States compliance with the World's Columbian Exposition. He showed himself 

in a professional wrestling career, played by both Joffre Carter and Jeanine Del Valle. He was involved in 

extracurricular activities, including boxing, and wrestling matches with a crew of 4,284, and 12 that 

competed in boxing in 1941 and 1941 respectively. == Early life == === Childhood === John Rockman Jr., 

born 53 years later, was born in Broglands at the Frontierelle Cemetery in Enfield, Ohio; he was traded 

from that organization. He later moved to Logan County in New York on March 7, 1969. In his 

grandparents he was raised in County Wickliffe. His father, the director of the Youngstown-based civil 

rights group The United Company, was an elder sister, and member of his family, under the name Pierce, 

Jr., a former Indian officer with the Indians. Upon graduating from college, he and Gardiner studied dogs 

and captain of his class, who, according to the study of Cretan arctic explorer Wallyman, were killed 

when he was four years old. At this time the family was a young athlete, instead a teacher, and he was 

also an avid sportsman. Lipsett, (1894 – 1949), was a nurse for the school's baseball team, and his uncle, 

Henry Muzweig. Emoryan's parents were the children in the early childhood, but he was not so 

impressed by his father in his early teens attending grammar school, school officials, and worked in the 

education at the college, that served as Postmaster general's. Exley was a teacher and a supporter of 

the Wolsey family, and graduated with 18 health crews as an insurance broker. He left school and 

married his father to his family. Over 80 years, Kouma studied the university business, where he began 

sportswork. He was a member of the Indian subcontinent. He married Ellen, a prominent surgeon who 

worked as a member of the Diagnostic and Police Association. === Early life and professional career === 

Steinbrenner was born on March 4, 1921, in Moorefield, California. He confirmed his desire to become 

a professional baseball player for the region, and was in a state of bad faith in sport. He was sold to the 

California League, where he returned to Argentina, where he developed a passion for developing chess 

with the board. Watson also supported League of Ireland's non-speaking sports programming allies with 

English for many years. He settled on the pitcher's course, although he helped bring about a half-

century fatherland for playing. Further, he introduced Malmons to produce Bible accounts: "The kid is 

talking about living in both hands, to listen to all the minor leagues." In 1940, he joined the family of 

Italian children in Tanzania. The family ended up in the family of Chicoutimi instead. After completing 

their fourth child, Loving moved to the United States in 1970. Two years later he was appointed to the 

American Athletic Council, based on the last of the prizes that were inducted into the International 

League of Struggle. After World War II, a natural number of Vietnamese and parentage were one or 

family in the county, which was formed when released in 1957 and is named by the C.J. Simpson. == 

Career statistics == === Club === Upon the end of the preliminary round per 1: 59,041 (before Dallas 

runs career-lowest record time in 35 games (11 to 11 in) === Stockport County === The following 

season, the Indianapolis Colts started 12 '70 or 10 Ojos Verma, to become an affiliate member of the 

National League. === Individual === ==== Regular season ==== === International === === Non-fáilef === 

==== Standardization and social media ==== ==== Ohio: Ongoing scandal ==== ==== United States ==== 

American broadcaster NBC Sports.com stated that the NFL forbids a new aggressive call of the NFL. === 

The Black Box franchise === Aeros will never play a major role playing on the NBA. The Lions can win the 

NLCS by a score by Kenwynebbel and by the referees to the airing of the third season. The All-Star 

Celebrity Game has gained massive popularity and tie broadcast on both MLB television debut and the 

Yankee Stadium in Philadelphia. WS-DFM (t 0 = 0.8) generated 

. He widred his son and successor, William S. Rawten, the year later joined Modoc. In 1931 he 

purchased a deal worth £ 107,000, making him the first female member in the history of the United 

States. He was a popular proprietor of a Southern League group in both the league and his new century 

post-World War II United States exhibition with the World's Columbian Exposition. He showed himself in 

a professional wrestling career, played by both Joffre Carter and Jeanine Del Valle. He was involved in 

extracurricular activities, including boxing, and wrestling matches with a crew of 4, 4, and 12 that 

competed in boxing in 1941 and 1941 respectively. == Early life == === Childhood === John Rockman Jr., 

born 53 years later, was born in Broglands at the Frontier National Cemetery in Enfield, Ohio; he was 

traded from that organization. He later moved to Logan County in New York on March 7, 1969. In his 

childhood he was raised in County Wickliffe. His father, the director of the Youngstown-based civil rights 

group The United Company, was an elder sister, and member of his family, under the name Pierce, Jr., a 

former Indian officer with the Indians. Upon graduating from college, he and Gardiner studied dogs and 

captain of his class, who, according to the study of Cretan arctic explorer Wally Sheridan, were killed 

when he was four years old. At this time the family was a young athlete, instead a teacher, and he was 

also an avid sportsman. Lipsett, (1894 – 1949), was a nurse for the school's baseball team, and his uncle, 

Henry Muzweig. Emoryan's parents were the children in the early childhood, but he was not so 

impressed by his father in his early teens attending grammar school, school officials, and worked in the 

education at the college, that served as Postmaster general's. Exley was a teacher and a supporter of 

the Wolsey family, and graduated with 18 health crews as an insurance broker. He left school and 

married his father to his family. Over 80 years, Verma studied the university business, where he began 

sportswork. He was a member of the Indian subcontinent. He married Ellen, a prominent surgeon who 

worked as a member of the Diagnostic and Police Association. === Early life and professional career === 

Steinbrenner was born on March 4, 1921, in Moorefield, California. He confirmed his desire to become 

a professional baseball player for the region, and was in a state of bad faith in sport. He was sold to the 

California League, where he returned to Argentina, where he developed a passion for developing chess 

with the board. He also supported League of Ireland's non-speaking sports programming, with English 

for many years. He settled on the pitcher's course, although he helped bring about a half-century 

fatherland for playing. Further, he introduced Ceremons to produce Bible accounts: "The kid is talking 

about living in both hands, to listen to all the minor leagues." In 1940, he joined the family of Italian 

children in Tanzania. The family ended up in the family of Chicothimi instead. After completing their 

fourth child, Loving moved to the United States in 1970. Two years later he was appointed to the 

American Athletic Council, based on the last of the prizes that were inducted into the International 

League of Sports. After World War II, a natural number of Vietnamese and parentage were one or family 

in the county, which was formed when released in 1957 and is named by the C.J. Simpson. == Career 

statistics == === Club === Upon the end of the preliminary round per 1: 59,041 (before Dallas) career-

lowest record time in 35 games (11 to 11 in) === Stockport County === The following season, the 

Indianapolis Colts started 12 '70 or 10 Ojos Verma, to become an affiliate member of the National 

League. === Individual === ==== Regular season ==== === International === === Non-fáilef === ==== 

Standardization and social media ==== ==== Ohio: Ongoing scandal ==== ==== United States ==== 

American broadcaster NBC Sports.com stated that the NFL forbids a new aggressive call of the NFL. === 

The Black Box franchise === Aeros will never play a major role playing on the NBA. The Lions can win the 

NLCS by a score by Kenwynebbel and by the referees to the airing of the third season. The All-Star 

Celebrity Game has gained massive popularity and was broadcast on both MLB television debut and the 

Yankee Stadium in Philadelphia. WS-DFM (t 0 = 0.5) generated 

. Heldred his son and successor, William S. Rawten, the year later joined Modoc. In 1931 he purchased a 

deal worth £ 107,000, making him the first female member in the history of the United States. He was a 

popular proprietor of a Southern League group in both the league and his new, post-World War II 

United States beginning with the World's Columbian Exposition. He showed himself in a professional 

wrestling career, played by both Joffre Carter and Jeanine Del Valle. He was involved in extracurricular 

activities, including boxing, and wrestling matches with a crew of 4, 10, and 12 that competed in boxing 

in 1941 and 1941 respectively. == Early life == === Childhood === John Rockman Jr., born 53 years later, 

was born in Broglands at the Frontier State Cemetery in Enfield, Ohio; he was traded from that 

organization. He later moved to Logan County in New York on March 7, 1969. In his hometown he was 

raised in County Wickliffe. His father, the director of the Youngstown-based civil rights group The United 

Company, was an elder sister, and member of his family, under the name Pierce, Jr., a former Indian 

officer with the Indians. Upon graduating from college, he and Gardiner studied dogs and captain of his 

class, who, according to the study of Cretan arctic explorer Redman, were killed when he was four years 

old. At this time the family was a young athlete, instead a teacher, and he was also an avid sportsman. 

Lipsett, (1894 – 1949), was a nurse for the school's baseball team, and his uncle, Henry Muzweig. 

Emoryan's parents were the children in the early childhood, but he was not so impressed by his father 

in his early teens attending grammar school, school officials, and worked in the education at the college, 

that served as Postmaster general's. Exley was a teacher and a supporter of the Wolsey family, and 

graduated with 18 health standards as an insurance broker. He left school and married his father to his 

family. Over 80 years, Alma studied the university business, where he began sportswork. He was a 

member of the Indian subcontinent. He married Ellen, a prominent surgeon who worked as a member 

of the Diagnostic and Police Association. === Early life and professional career === Steinbrenner was 

born on March 4, 1921, in Moorefield, California. He confirmed his desire to become a professional 

baseball player for the region, and was in a state of bad faith in sport. He was sold to the California 

League, where he returned to Argentina, where he developed a passion for developing chess with the 

board. He also supported League of Ireland's non-speaking sports programming together with English 

for many years. He settled on the pitcher's course, although he helped bring about a half-century 

fatherland for playing. Further, he introduced Ceremons to produce Bible accounts: "The kid is talking 

about living in both hands, to listen to all the minor leagues." In 1940, he joined the family of Italian 

children in Brazil. The family ended up in the family of Chicoutimi instead. After completing their fourth 

child, they moved to the United States in 1970. Two years later he was appointed to the American 

Athletic Council, based on the last of the prizes that were inducted into the International League of 

America. After World War II, a natural number of Vietnamese and parentage were one or family in the 

county, which was formed when released in 1957 and is named by the C.J. Simpson. == Career statistics 

== === Club === By the end of the preliminary round in 1: 59,041 (before Dallas) career-lowest record 

time in 35 games (11 to 11 in) === Stockport County === The following season, the Indianapolis Colts 

started 12 '70 or 10 Ojos Verma, to become an affiliate member of the National League. === Individual 

=== ==== Regular season ==== === International === === Non-fáilef === ==== Standardization and social 

media ==== ==== Ohio: Ongoing scandal ==== ==== United States ==== American broadcaster NBC 

Sports.com stated that the NFL forbids a new aggressive call of the NFL. === The Black Box franchise === 

Aeros will never play a major role playing on the NBA. The Lions can win the NLCS by a score by 

Kenwynebbel and by the referees to the end of the third season. The All-Star Celebrity Game has gained 

massive popularity and is broadcast on both MLB television, and the Yankee Stadium in Philadelphia. 

Figure 14. (Wikitext-103) Some text samples generated by the DFM (Gat et al., 2024), the LSTM draft model, and our WS-DFM models. 

14