Title: Improving Adversarial Robustness of Attribution via Implicit Regularization

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2605.29983v1

Published Time: Fri, 29 May 2026 01:47:07 GMT

Number of Pages: 39

Markdown Content:
# Improving Adversarial Robustness of Attribution via Implicit Regularization 

Amir Mehrpanah 1 Matteo Gamba 2 Hossein Azizpour 1 3 

## Abstract 

The adversarial robustness of attributions is a fun-damental requirement for reliable explainability in deep learning, yet existing approaches typi-cally rely on computationally expensive explicit regularization. In this work, we show that attri-bution robustness can arise implicitly from the learning dynamics of standard stochastic gradi-ent descent. We theoretically motivate this effect through connections between parameter-space and input-space curvature, and validate it across architectures, datasets, and attribution methods, with negligible computational overhead. In con-trast, we prove that such robustness gains often does not transfer to attention-based attribution under softmax normalization, due to inherent en-tropy constraints, and we validate this limitation experimentally. Finally, we show that replacing softmax attention with kernel-based attention re-stores the robustness gains in transformer mod-els. Our results highlight learning dynamics as a principled and practical mechanism for robust ex-plainability, and reveal fundamental limitations of attention-based attribution under normalization. 

## 1. Introduction 

Attribution methods are among the most widely used tools in explainable AI (XAI), providing a means to relate a model’s prediction back to the input features (Ancona et al., 2018; Arrieta et al., 2020; Bai et al., 2023). Their simplicity and broad applicability underpin their success across domains such as computer vision (Adebayo et al., 2018), natural lan-guage processing (DeYoung et al., 2020), graph learning (Lu et al., 2024), and tabular modeling (Haug et al., 2021). We study attributions derived from input gradients (Si-monyan et al., 2014), including common post-hoc smooth-

> 1

Department of Computer Science, KTH Royal Institute of Technology, Stockholm, Sweden 2Department of Computer Science, Brown University, USA 3Science for Life Laboratory, Stockholm, Sweden. Correspondence to: Amir Mehrpanah 

<amirme@kth.se >.

Preprint. May 29, 2026. 

ing variants, as well as attributions based on attention weights (Abnar & Zuidema, 2020), which have become prominent with the rise of attention-based models. Despite their widespread use, gradient- and attention-based attributions often behave unreliably: maps can be inconsis-tent (Tomsett et al., 2020), misleading (Liu et al., 2022), or sensitive to perturbations irrelevant to the decision (Kinder-mans et al., 2019; Alvarez-Melis & Jaakkola, 2018). They rely on fragile heuristics (Jain & Wallace, 2019; Bansal et al., 2020; Adebayo et al., 2018) and they are vulnerable to imperceptible adversarial manipulations (Ghorbani et al., 2019; Pruthi et al., 2020). These issues raise a fundamental question: how can we improve the robustness of attribution? 

In this work, we focus on two main classes of attributions– gradient and attention based–and study their robustness to adversarial perturbations through implicit forms of regular-izing input curvature of learnt functions. 

Robustness of Gradient-based Attribution. Since adver-sarial sensitivity of gradient-based attribution is tied to input curvature (Ghorbani et al., 2019; Moosavi-Dezfooli et al., 2019), prior work has explored smoothing activation func-tions (Dombrowski et al., 2022), explicit curvature regular-ization (Wang et al., 2020; Chen et al., 2023), and adversar-ial training (Kamath et al., 2024). These strategies, however, face practical limitations: the benefits of activation smooth-ing are unclear for architectures such as ViT, which already exploit smooth activations such as GELU (Dosovitskiy et al., 2021; Hendrycks, 2016) by default. Also, existing theoreti-cal analysis (Daniely et al., 2016; Nwankpa et al., 2018), as well as established initialization schemes (He et al., 2015; Mirzadeh et al., 2024), are largely centered around ReLU. Moreover, explicit curvature regularization and adversarial training relies on approximating second-order derivatives, leading to prohibitive computational and memory overhead at scale, which limits the scalability to large models. 

Robustness of Attention-based Attribution. Although attribution fragility also affects attention-based meth-ods (Liu et al., 2022; Jain & Wallace, 2019; Serrano & Smith, 2019), robustness techniques have largely focused on gradient-based attributions. This raises the question whether 1  

> arXiv:2605.29983v1 [cs.LG] 28 May 2026 Improving Adversarial Robustness of Attribution via Implicit Regularization (Proposition 1) (Section C.1)
> Figure 1. Implicit Regularization; An Efficient Alternative to Attribution Robustness. This figure summarizes the key mechanisms underlying attribution robustness. In CNNs and MLPs, training near the edge of stability biases SGD toward flatter regions of the parameter landscape, while smaller learning rates favor sharper minima. By linking established results on SGD implicit regularization with parameter–input curvature transfer (Proposition 1), we show that flatter parameter regions yield more robust gradient-based attributions. For ViTs with softmax attention, robustness is instead governed by attention entropy (Proposition 2). Finally, we demonstrate that implicit regularization can also improve attention-based attribution robustness when softmax is replaced by kernelized attention in ViT-B/16.

these improvements transfer to attention-based settings. 

Implicit Regularization in Gradient-Based Attribution. 

The limitations in gradient-based approaches motivate an alternative route to robust attributions—one that avoids ex-plicit curvature penalties and remains architecture-agnostic. Leveraging recent insights on the implicit curvature regu-larization induced by SGD, and on connections between curvature in parameter and input spaces (Ma & Ying, 2021; Dherin et al., 2022; Gamba et al., 2023b), we argue that SGD provides a mechanism for indirectly controlling input curvature (Moosavi-Dezfooli et al., 2019; Zhu et al., 2024; Li et al., 2025) (see Figure 1 and Section C.1). This yields a simple, efficient, and architecture-agnostic approach to improving gradient-based attribution robustness, which we refer to by Implicit Curvature Regularization (ICR). 

Implicit Regularization in Attention-Based Attribution. 

Because attention-based attributions are more common in attention-based architectures, we examine their robustness separately. For softmax attention, we argue theoretically and empirically that techniques improving gradient-based attri-butions do not reliably transfer to attention-based methods and can even degrade their robustness. We trace this issue to the softmax operation and demonstrate that kernelized attention modules restore transferability, yielding robustness gains comparable to those seen for gradient-based methods. 

Outline. Section 3 introduces notation and formulates attribution robustness via the input Hessian. Section 4 estab-lishes the link between parameter- and input-space curvature. Then, drawing on this analysis, it motivates our approach to robust gradient-based attribution. Section 5 extends the anal-ysis to attention-based attribution, characterizes its distinct robustness properties, and proposes a kernelized attention for transferability of gradient-based robustness techniques. Section 6 empirically assesses the effectiveness of ICR and evaluates the transferability of techniques to attention-based attribution comparing softmax vs . kernelized attention. 

Contributions. 

• We provide a unifying theoretical perspective that con-nects optimization-induced implicit regularization to adversarial robustness of gradient-based explanations. • We theoretically analyze the robustness of attention-based attribution, showing that its behavior differs fun-damentally from gradient-based methods. • We identify the source of this discrepancy and show that unnormalized kernelized attention restores the transferability of implicit regularization. 

## 2. Related Works 

Input–Parameter Sharpness. Prior work has examined relationships between curvature in parameter space and in input space, providing bounds that link the two and empiri-cal evidence that flatter loss landscapes yield smoother input gradients (Ma & Ying, 2021; Dherin et al., 2022; Gamba et al., 2023b;a). Complementary analyses bound local Lip-schitz constants for CNNs and ViTs, emphasizing the role of architectural components—such as convolution or atten-tion—in controlling sensitivity (Kim et al., 2021; Castin et al., 2024; Yudin et al., 2025; Wang & Manchester, 2023; Pintore & Despr´ es, 2024; Sulehman & Mu, 2024). 2Improving Adversarial Robustness of Attribution via Implicit Regularization 0.04 0.06 0.08 0.10 0.12 

> 63
> 65
> 67
> 69
> 71
> 73
> 75 Validation Accuracy (%)
> Base AAR PAR ICR
> ECR ATR SAM ( R) Sensitivity

(a) Base AAR PAR ICR  

> ECR ATR SAM 02468Duration (GPU hours)

(b) 0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 ( R) Sensitivity  

> 71
> 73
> 75
> 77
> 79
> 81
> 83
> 85 Validation Accuracy (%)
> Base AAR PAR ICR ECR ATR SAM

(c) Base AAR PAR ICR ECR ATR SAM 0.0 0.5 1.0 1.5 2.0 2.5 Duration (GPU hours) (d) Figure 2. Tradeoffs in Robustness Methods for Gradient-based Attribution. Adversarial sensitivity of gradient-based attribution (measured by ̸ R, Equation (6)) shown on the x-axes of (a) and (c), with validation accuracy on the y-axes. Panels (c,d) report results for ViT-B/16 and (a,b) for ResNet-50 on Imagenette. To illustrate computational tradeoffs, training times on an NVIDIA A100 are included in (b) and (d). ICR † denotes the variant of implicit curvature regularization with differential learning rates for ViT (see Section A.1). Across both architectures, ICR achieves competitive accuracy with minimal overhead, offering a favorable balance between robustness, performance and computational cost (see Figure 6). ECR attains the highest accuracy at roughly 4× the cost of ICR; and finally, ATR and SAM incur similar overhead due to requiring a second backward pass. 

Parameter- and input-space curvature are often treated in isolation: implicit regularization and edge-of-stability anal-yses characterize optimization-induced control of param-eter gradients , while attribution robustness concerns the stability of input gradients . Despite empirical correlations, it remains theoretically unclear how optimization-induced regularization of parameter gradients transfers to input gra-dients, which are the object of attribution. Establishing this transfer is the focus of Proposition 1. We observe that attribution robustness, for both attention-and gradient-based methods, is highly sensitive to optimiza-tion choices an aspect largely under-reported in prior work. 

Explicit vs . Implicit Curvature Regularization. Explicit curvature control typically optimizes a regularized objective: 

min  

> Θ

Ex∼D [L(fΘ(x), y) + λΩ] ,

where Ω involves finite-difference curvature estimates, as in adversarial training (ATR) (Goodfellow et al., 2015), or second-order terms, as in Explicit Curvature Regulariza-tion (ECR) (Jastrzebski et al., 2021). Sharpness-Aware Minimization (SAM) (Foret et al., 2021) instead biases op-timization toward flatter minima via paired ascent–descent steps. While effective, these methods are computationally costly—about 4× slower—making them difficult to scale. More recently, Zhu et al. (2024); Li et al. (2022) analyzed the “edge of stability” phenomenon in SGD training, where transient loss spikes (“catapults”) are closely tied to implicit regularization of the parameter curvature (Lee et al., 2023). These insights, together with the relationship between input and parameter curvature motivate implicit curvature reg-ularization (ICR) as a scalable way to indirectly improve attribution robustness at a lower computational cost. 

Attribution Robustness and Adversarial Manipulation. 

The fragility of gradient-based attribution methods has been well documented. Attribution maps can change drastically under small perturbations in the input (Ghorbani et al., 2019) or model parameters (Heo et al., 2019), respond to spurious factors (Kindermans et al., 2019; Adebayo et al., 2018; Liu et al., 2022), or be deliberately manipulated (Slack et al., 2020; Poursabzi-Sangdeh et al., 2021; Serrano & Smith, 2019; Pruthi et al., 2020). To explain these vulnerabili-ties, (Singla et al., 2019; Ghorbani et al., 2019; Lin et al., 2023) linked attribution robustness to input-space curvature: sharper local geometry amplifies perturbation sensitivity. As a mitigation, several approaches have been proposed ranging from smoothing out ReLU, such as Softplus (Dom-browski et al., 2019; 2022), to adding explicit input curva-ture regularization terms (Chen et al., 2019; Wang et al., 2020; Chen et al., 2023; Lim et al., 2021; Ivankay et al., 2021; Gong et al., 2024; Sarkar et al., 2021), and adversarial training (Kamath et al., 2024; Mangla et al., 2020). These strategies face limitations in practice: activation re-placements can degrade performance and explicit regular-ization terms do not easily scale. In contrast, we argue that gradient-based attribution robustness can be improved by implicit regularization during training, without altering the architecture or incurring prohibitive computational cost. 

## 3. Preliminaries and Notation 

Let fΘ : D → Rd denote a classifier on d classes parame-terized by Θ = {θ1, . . . , θ L}, with logits z = fΘ(x) ∈

Rd, defined on the input vector x ∈ D ⊂ Rn accom-panied by one-hot label y that implicitly depends on x.We use p = Softmax ( z) and the log-sum-exp operator 

LSE( z) = log 

P 

> j

ezj



, where zj is the jth entry of z.3Improving Adversarial Robustness of Attribution via Implicit Regularization 

The former mappings are related by ∇z LSE( z) = p and 

∇zp = diag( p) − pp ⊤, We denote the gradient of the logits w.r.t. the input by ∇xz : Rn → Rn. The gradients can be processed post-hoc— e.g ., via low-pass filtering in different attribution methods. As post-hoc low-pass filter-ing (Mehrpanah et al., 2025a) is orthogonal to optimization, we examine such methods empirically in Section 6. As our goal is to connect attribution robustness with the lit-erature on training dynamics, we compute attributions with respect to the negative log-probability outputs, rather than the more common logit gradients ∇xzi used in the XAI literature. Specifically, we consider −li for some class i,where l = z − LSE( z). This choice ensures consistency be-tween attribution robustness and the theoretical framework on SGD and curvature regularization. Furthermore, we con-sider the input Hessian 1, denoted by Hx(Θ) : Rn → Rn×n.Next, we discuss how SGD dynamics can influence input curvature–and thus attribution robustness. As our analysis is inherently local, we omit the qualifier “local” for brevity. 

## 4. Gradient-based Attribution Robustness 

Attribution methods seek to explain model predictions by identifying the input features most responsible for the output. For such explanations to be reliable, they must be robust: small perturbations of the input should not induce large vari-ations in the attribution. Hence, the sensitivity of attribution methods is inherently linked to the curvature of the model in input space (Singla et al., 2019; Ghorbani et al., 2019). 

4.1. From Parameter Sharpness to Input Sharpness 

The input Hessian provides a direct measure of attribution robustness, yet computing or regularizing it explicitly is computationally costly (often 4× slower than standard un-regularized training, cf . Figure 2). A natural question thus arises: Can we control input sharpness at a lower cost? 

Prior work shows that training near the edge of stability with SGD induces an implicit regularization of parameter-space curvature. However, attribution robustness depends on input gradients, which live in a different space. It is therefore not immediate that controlling parameter curvature translates into stable input gradients. Our contribution is to formalize this connection as an im-plicit inductive bias : under standard optimization dynamics, training with a sufficiently large learning rate implicitly bi-ases solutions toward lower input curvature, and hence more robust gradient-based attributions. To make this connection precise, we adopt standard analyt-

> 1Related work studies attribution robustness via the second fundamental form; see Section E for details.

ical assumptions commonly used in the study of SGD im-plicit regularization ( e.g ., smooth losses, near-convergence stability regime), which provide a tractable—although ideal-ized—framework for isolating the mechanism (see, e.g ., (Wu & Su, 2023; Lee et al., 2023; Dherin et al., 2022; Gamba et al., 2023a)). In the following proposition, we show that optimization-induced regularization of parameter curvature provably 

transfers to reduced input curvature, thereby inducing an implicit bias toward attribution robustness (see Section C.1 for derivations and discussion of assumptions). 

Proposition 1 (Linking SGD implicit regularization and input curvature) . Let fΘ be a neural network trained by SGD with a constant learning rate η on dataset D. Assume, 

(i) training operates in a near-convergence, linearly stable regime, (ii) the loss is twice continuously differentiable in parameters and inputs, and (iii) the aggregate layerwise scaled signal-to-noise ratio (as defined in Equation (1) ) is non-decreasing w.r.t. learning rate η:

c(x) := 

> L

X

> l=1

∥hl−1(x)∥22

∥θl∥22 ∥∇ xhl−1(x)∥22

, (1) 

Let Θ∗

> 1

, Θ∗ 

> 2

denote the stationary SGD solutions obtained with learning rates η1 < η 2. Then, in the asymptotic regime and in expectation over SGD noise, 

E[λmax (Hx(Θ ∗

> 2

))] ≲ E[λmax (Hx(Θ ∗

> 1

))] . (2) 

Where λmax is the largest eigen value of input Hessian Hx.

Intuition. Proposition 1 establishes a transfer between parameter-space and input-space geometry: implicit regular-ization of parameter gradients induced by SGD dynamics bounds the expected adversarial curvature of input gradi-ents (see Figure 15). Unlike prior approaches to attribution robustness, this mechanism does not require explicit regular-ization of the input Hessian or architectural modifications. While the result builds on existing bounds linking parameter and input curvature, its contribution lies in showing how training dynamics alone—near the edge of stability—can improve the adversarial robustness of attributions. We vali-date this connection across architectures in Section 6. In the next section, we examine adversarial robustness in attention-based attributions and assess how techniques de-signed for gradient-based robustness transfer to this setting. 

## 5. An Inherent Limitation of Attention-Based Attribution Robustness 

While Proposition 1 provides an efficient means to enhance the robustness of gradient-based attributions, attention-based attributions behave differently. In contrast to gradient-4Improving Adversarial Robustness of Attribution via Implicit Regularization 

based methods, their robustness is not governed by input-space curvature. We show that for softmax attention, at-tribution robustness is constrained by layer entropy, which arises from the normalization inherent to softmax and can-not be overcome by optimization-induced regularization alone. This leads to a non-transferability result formalized in Proposition 2 (see Section C.2 for derivations). 

Proposition 2 (Minimum attainable entropy bounds atten-tion-based attribution robustness) . Let Ent min and Ent Unif 

denote the minimum and maximum attainable entropy of an attention layer, respectively. Denote by Ainit the attention scores for a given input, and denote by Aattack the atten-tion scores after an adversarial perturbation. Denote the sensitivity of the attention layer by ̸

R (Ainit ) := max 

> Aattack

∥Aattack − Ainit ∥2. (3) 

Such that Ent( Aattack ) > Ent min . Then ̸ R (Ainit ) is mono-tonically decreasing w.r.t. Ent min .

As Ent min approaches the uniform entropy Ent Unif , the maximal deviation ̸ R vanishes (see Figure 3). Accordingly, softmax attention layers with smaller Ent min are more sus-ceptible to perturbations and thus less robust. 

Remark 1 (Entropy lower bound and learning rate) . Propo-sition 2 can be linked to Zhai et al. (2023, Thm. 3.1), show-ing that the minimum attainable attention entropy depends on the spectral norm of the attention input. Specifically, letting σx = ∥XX ⊤∥2, σ = ∥WK W ⊤ 

> Q

∥2, sequence length 

T , they show that for large σ and T ,

Ent min = Ω( T σe −σσ x ) (4) 

Since σ increases with learning rate (see Figure 3), training on the edge of stability exponentially decreases Ent min and, by Proposition 2, increases the sensitivity ̸ R (Ainit ).

Corollary 1 (Entropy-limited robustness of normalized at-tention) . Under normalized attention mechanisms, the ro-bustness of attention-based attributions is constrained by the minimum attainable entropy of the attention layer. In particular, reductions in parameter curvature—implicit or explicit—do not, in general, improve ̸ R (Ainit ) beyond this entropy-imposed bound. Consequently, techniques that improve gradient-based attri-bution robustness often do not directly transfer to softmax-based attention mechanisms (see Table 7). 

Escaping the Entropy Constraint. Importantly, Propo-sition 2 does not rely on softmax per se, but on the nor-malization inherent to softmax, which induces an entropy floor. Removing softmax normalization places the model outside such entropy-constrained regime. This motivates unnormalized kernelized attention–via element-wise feature maps ϕ on Q and K (Katharopoulos et al., 2020; Luo et al., 2021)–as a minimal intervention to probe this mechanism. In our study, kernelized attention primarily serves as a con-trolled verification baseline: it introduces a single architec-tural change, allowing us to test the role of normalization without introducing additional confounders. As we show empirically, lifting the entropy bound restores the transfer-ability of ICR, enabling improvements in attention-based attribution robustness, in agreement with Proposition 1. We emphasize that kernelized attention is not intended as a fi-nal solution for achieving robust attention-based attributions. Rather, it demonstrates that the entropy constraint arises from normalization and suggests that achieving robustness in softmax-based architectures may require more specialized architectural or normalization-aware approaches. In the next section, we empirically compare five alternatives against ICR for improving the robustness of gradient-based methods and evaluate their impact on attention-based attri-bution methods for kernelized and softmax-based attention. 

## 6. Experiments 

In the following, we introduce alternative methods for robust gradient-based attribution, design our evaluation framework, and compare their effectiveness in improving gradient-based attribution robustness. We further examine how these tech-niques transfer to robustness of attention-based attribution in both softmax and kernelized attention modules. 

6.1. Designing an Evaluation Framework 

Evaluating attribution’s adversarial robustness is computa-tionally expensive, as it often requires computing second-order input gradients. Moreover, the results can depend on various design choices and hyperparameters. To ensure a principled and fair comparison, we employ an identical evaluation setup across all experiments. In addition, a con-sistent normalization strategy is essential for making fair judgments among alternative methods. 

Attribution Adversarial Loss. We measure adversarial robustness by worst-case, sample-wise changes in attribu-tion. Therefore, for each sample, we optimize an established adversarial objective (Chen et al., 2019; 2023; Dombrowski et al., 2022; Ghorbani et al., 2019) to find the largest eigen-value corresponding to the directional changes in attribution: ̸

R (e, f ) = max 

> ∥δ∥≤ ε

e(x)

∥e(x)∥ − e(x′)

∥e(x′)∥ − γ∥l − l′∥ (5) 

= max  

> ∥δ∥≤ ε

2 sin( α

2 ) − γ∥l − l′∥. (6) Where all norms are L2, e is an attribution method, such as VanillaGrad e(x) = ∇xli, for i = arg max j lj . Moreover, 5Improving Adversarial Robustness of Attribution via Implicit Regularization 

Table 1. Comparative Ranking of Sensitivity Methods for Gradient-Based Attribution. This table summarizes the trade-offs among methods for improving the robustness of gradient-based attribution (see Section 6.2; also visualized in Figure 6). We report validation accuracy, the sensitivity metric ̸ R (defined in Equation (6)) for ResNet50 and ViT-B/16, computational cost, and hyperparameters (“hparams.”). Methods are grouped into ranks representing mutually non-significant differences using t-tests at a 95% confidence level, and an overall rank which is obtained by summing these ranks, with lower values indicating better performance. To be able to measure the effect of activation modification we consistently use ReLU-based ViTs in all experiments except AAR and PAR methods. Nonetheless, ICR achieves the best overall ranking confirming that competitive robustness values are achievable regardless of the choice of activation function for gradient-based attribution. In the last row, ICR/ICR † refers to CNN and ViT respectively. Under the computational cost we use an abstract notation for order, where “ F ” and “ Bx”, respectively denote a forward pass and a backward pass with respect to the input. Method ↑Acc %Rank ↓̸ RRank Comp. Cost Rank hparams. Rank Overall 

ResNet50 ViT-B/16 ResNet50 ViT-B/16 Rank 

No Regularization (Base) 77 ±3% 5 67 ±1% 4 0.61 ±0.55 0.11 ±0.14 F + Bθ 1 - 1 5

Ante-hoc Act. Reg. (AAR) 75 ±5% 6 63 ±2% 6 0.10 ±0.22 0.07 ±0.02 F + Bθ 1 lr + β 2 4

Post-hoc Act. Reg. (PAR) 10 ±0% 7 59 ±1% 7 0.00 ±0.01 0.06 ±0.01 F + Bθ 1 lr + β 2 4

Explicit Curv. Reg. (ECR) 84 ±3% 1 74 ±2% 1 0.11 ±0.32 0.08 ±0.13 F + Bx + Bθx3 lr + λ 2 2

Adv. Trainig Reg. (ATR) 78 ±2% 4 68 ±1% 3 0.21 ±0.33 0.08 ±0.03 2F + Bx + Bθ 2 lr + ϵ 2 3

Sharp. Aware Min. (SAM) 79 ±4% 3 66 ±2% 5 0.30 ±0.54 0.10 ±0.14 2F + 2 Bθ 2 lr + ρ 2 5

Implicit Curv. Reg. (ICR/ICR †) 83 ±2% 2 73 ±1% 2 0.10 ±0.22 0.07 ±0.02 F + Bθ 1 lr 1 1

x′ = x + δ, l′ = z′ − LSE ( z′), z′ = f (x′), and α is the angle between flattened attributions, showing that ̸ R ≲ 2.Since attribution maps are typically normalized before vi-sualization, we focus on changes in direction rather than magnitude , as the former more closely corresponds to se-mantic shifts. Also, as ̸ R quantifies the sensitivity, lower values indicate higher robustness (see Section A for imple-mentation details and hyperparameters). 

Additional Metrics. Relying on a single robustness met-ric, as in Tab. 3, or on correlated measures (Kamath et al., 2024), can be misleading. For instance, a model might ex-hibit maximal attribution robustness only after its accuracy collapses to random chance (see PAR in Figure 2). Hence, in addition to attribution robustness, we include three uncor-related metrics that complements our evaluation: validation accuracy, training time, and design constraints. We always include a baseline trained without any regular-ization ( i.e . using none of the alternatives discussed in Sec-tion 6.2 and refer to it by “Base” in figures and tables) to serve as a reference for ̸ R.

No Post-Hoc Activation Replacement at Evaluation. As discussed in Section 3, we compute attributions using nega-tive log-probabilities instead of the network logits, to align the explainability literature with the findings in optimization and learning dynamics. This means that we have nonzero second-order gradients even in ReLU networks, eliminating the need for post-hoc activation changes during evaluation, which is done in (Ivankay et al., 2021; Dombrowski et al., 2019). This simplifies the protocol, improves reproducibil-ity, and more accurately reflects real deployment settings. 

Gradient-Based Attribution Methods. While our the-oretical analysis in Propositions 1 and 2 is focused on 

VanillaGradient (Simonyan et al., 2014) for analytical sim-plicity, we empirically evaluate five additional gradient-based attribution methods from the same family, namely 

Input ×Gradient (Shrikumar et al., 2017), GuidedBack-prop (Springenberg et al., 2015), DeepLift (Shrikumar et al., 2017), GradCAM (Selvaraju et al., 2017), and Integrated-Gradients (Sundararajan et al., 2017) (see Table 3). 

Attention-Based Attribution Methods. We also evaluate five attention-based attribution methods designed specifi-cally for ViTs. These include RawAttention (Jain & Wallace, 2019; Serrano & Smith, 2019), which uses the attention map of the final layer; AttentionMean (Dosovitskiy et al., 2021), which averages attention maps across layers; Atten-tionRollout and AttentionFlow (Abnar & Zuidema, 2020), which propagate attention maps across layers; and finally, 

AttGrad (Chefer et al., 2021), which combines attention maps with their corresponding input gradients (see Table 7). The robustness of gradient- and attention-based methods are usually correlated with their corresponding vanilla form, after applying post-hoc smoothing (see Figure 13). 

Datasets and Architectures. We use the Imagenette dataset (Howard, 2019) (224 ×224) and report results with 

ResNet50 (He et al., 2016) and ViT-B/16 (Wu et al., 2020) in the main text and for the ablation studies. Additional experiments are conducted on CIFAR10 (Krizhevsky et al., 2009) and STL10 (Coates et al., 2011) using smaller models such as ResNet34/18 and ViT-Tiny, as detailed in Section A. 6Improving Adversarial Robustness of Attribution via Implicit Regularization         

> (a) (b) (c) (d) Figure 3. Sensitivity of Attention-Based Attribution in Softmax vs. Unnormalized Kernelized Attention. This figure is based on ViT-B/16 trained on Imagenette, visualized over 500 samples per learning rate. We show the first attention layer; additional softmax-attention layers are in Figure 17. In panels (c,d) we visualize unnormalized kernelized attention with GELU activation; activation ablations appear in Figures 18, 20 and 21. Panels (a,c) plot the learning rate w.r.t. the deviation of attention entropy from the uniform distribution, while (b,d) report such deviation w.r.t. the sensitivity ( ̸Rdefined in Equation (6)). As predicted by Proposition 2, the distance to the uniform in softmax attention is directly correlated with ̸R, whereas for unnormalized kernelized attention with GELU activation, ICR †improves robustness. Moreover, large learning rates lead to lower entropy, more localized attributions, at the cost of reduced training stability.

6.2. Alternatives to Robust Gradient-based Attribution 

While prior work, under the lens of explainability, focuses on controlling input curvature (Ghorbani et al., 2019) to improve attribution robustness, Proposition 1 further links gradient-based attribution robustness to parameter curvature. This connection broadens our scope to include methods from optimization and robustness. We categorize these ap-proaches based on their target (input vs. parameter Hessian) and regularization mechanism (explicit vs. implicit), see Ta-ble 10 for a summary. We analyze these alternatives via their regularization term Ω within the general objective: 

min  

> Θ

Ex∼D [L(fΘ, x, y) + Ω] ,

where L(x, y) denotes the loss for the network fΘ(x).In the following, we briefly specify each alternative through its regularization term Ω or its objective. 

Explicit Regularization. Methods that explicitly penalize curvature-related terms typically incur high computational cost—about 4× slower than standard training in our experi-ments—since they usually require second-order derivatives with respect to the input. From this category, we consider the following baselines: 

1. Explicit Curvature Regularization (ECR): adds a penalty on the input Jacobian to enhance attribution ro-bustness, albeit at substantial computational cost (Hoff-man et al., 2019; Jastrzebski et al., 2021). The regular-ization term is defined as Ωλ = λ∥∇ xy⊤l∥2 

> F

, where we use L2 norm on the vectorized input gradient. 

2. Adversarial Training Regularization (ATR): con-strains input curvature by enforcing robustness against input perturbations (Goodfellow et al., 2015; Chalasani et al., 2020; Kafali et al., 2025). The perturbed input is given by x′ = max |δ|≤ ε L(x + δ, y), and the corre-sponding regularization term is Ωε = L (x′, y).

3. Sharpness-Aware Minimization (SAM): biases opti-mization toward flatter parameter minima (Foret et al., 2021), a property linked to adversarial robustness (Wei et al., 2023). The objective is given by: 

Lρ = min  

> Θ

Ex∼D 



max  

> ∥δ∥2≤ρ

L(fΘ+ δ , x, y)



.

This can be seen as a parameter-space analogue of adversarial training, where δ is in parameter space. 

Implicit Regularization. This method, that we also advo-cate for, influences the input curvature indirectly, providing a more efficient way to robust gradient-based attribution: 

4. Implicit Curvature Regularization (ICR): SGD training dynamics regularize the parameter curvature at the edge of stability, which is connected to input curvature in Proposition 1. In this case, we set Ω = 0 

and train the network near the edge of stability. 

Activation-Based Regularization. As initially suggested by (Dombrowski et al., 2019; 2022), modifying the activa-tion functions can also affect curvature. We refer to these methods as activation-based regularization. However, the application of this approach is unclear for ViTs as they use smooth activation functions by default: 

5,6. Post-hoc/Ante-hoc Activation Regularization (PAR/AAR): Reduces input curvature by replacing ReLU with a smoother activation function. Originally, Softplus( β) is proposed for ReLU-based CNNs/MLPs. 7Improving Adversarial Robustness of Attribution via Implicit Regularization 

This method employs the regular training loss (Base), but the regularization implicitly depends on β. We evaluate this approach after and before training, referring to these variants by post-hoc/ante-hoc activation regularization (PAR/AAR). 

6.3. Empirical Insights into Attribution Robustness 

Section 6.2 layouts common alternatives to improve gradient-based attribution robustness (summarized in Ta-ble 3), which we use as baselines to assess the performance of ICR. The experimental results for ViT-B/16 and ResNet50 on Imagenette dataset are provided in Tables 1, 3 and 7. Moreover, Table 2 summarizes our findings together with their corresponding material. 

Observations in Gradient-based Attribution. As shown in Table 1 and Figure 6, ICR achieves a favorable balance across different evaluation metrics. In contrast, other meth-ods tend to specialize: while some surpass ICR in a specific metric, they exhibit significantly weaker performance with respect to others. For instance, ECR achieves higher accu-racy on both architectures but at the cost of substantially greater computational cost (about 4× slower than Base). Conversely, PAR yields the most robust results across both architectures but exhibits the worst predictive performance. 

Key Takeaways for Gradient-Based Attribution. 

• The robustness of gradient-based attribution meth-ods is heavily affected by optimization dynamics ,in particular by the learning rate. • Attribution robustness can be improved without 

explicit regularization terms or architectural mod-ifications, thereby avoiding their associated com-putational cost and limited applicability. • Post-hoc changes (such as PAR) are often unnec-essary and detrimental to performance at evalua-tion time, and they can be avoided by using the negative log-likelihood instead of the logits. 

Observations in Attention-based Attribution. As shown in Table 7, methods that perform best for gradient-based at-tribution—most notably ECR and ICR—exhibit poor robust-ness under attention-based attribution, reflected by higher ̸

R values. This behavior is consistent with the analysis in Section 5, which argues that attention-based attribution robustness is governed by the attainable entropy of the at-tention layer—strongly influenced by the learning rate (see Figure 3)—rather than by curvature. As a result, curvature-based regularization techniques often do not transfer to attention-based attribution. Importantly, Proposition 2 shows that the loss of robustness at low entropy arises from normalization rather than from the softmax operation itself. Empirically, replacing softmax with unnormalized kernelized attention using a GELU ac-tivation allows ICR to improve attention-based robustness (see Figures 3 and 18). As unnormalized kernelized atten-tion modules are relatively underexplored (Koohpayegani & Pirsiavash, 2024; Han et al., 2023), we perform an ex-tensive ablation study over the choice of activation func-tion—including CosineSim, GELU, ReLU, ELU+1, and Softplus in Figures 18 to 21. 

Key Takeaways for Attention-Based Attribution. 

• The robustness of attention-based attribution is fundamentally different from gradient-based methods; consequently, robustness techniques de-veloped for gradient-based attribution often do not transfer to attention-based approaches. • This discrepancy is both due to the very definition of attention-based attribution and the normaliza-tion built in softmax. Thus, motivating the use of 

unnormalized kernelized attention .• Kernelized attention is a necessary condition . Ro-bustness, therefore, still depends on other factors, such as the choice of activation function, with GELU having a favorable behavior. 

## 7. Limitations and Future Work 

While our theoretical analysis establishes that training near the edge of stability improves adversarial attribution robust-ness, there is also empirical evidence for gains under random perturbations (see Table 4). Extending the current analyses to alternative notions of robustness, including average-case sensitivity, is an important direction for future work. Proposition 2 indicates that robustness methods for gradient-based attribution often do not transfer to attention-based at-tribution, identifying attention normalization as a key obsta-cle. To verify our theoretical claims in a controlled setting, we consider kernelized attention as a minimal intervention to the standard transformer architecture; more expressive mod-ifications ( e.g ., reparameterization-based approaches) may further improve robustness and are left for future work. Al-though replacing softmax with kernelized attention enables implicit regularization to improve attribution robustness, the effect is highly sensitive to the choice of activation function (cf . Figures 18 and 22). Moreover, modifying the attention mechanism prevents reusing the pretrained weights, and developing strategies that preserve compatibility with pretrained models ( e.g ., in 8Improving Adversarial Robustness of Attribution via Implicit Regularization 

large-scale or SSL settings) remains open. Establishing a theoretical link between the induced kernel and attribution robustness is another promising direction. In Proposition 2 we assume a fixed input-token length. Ex-tending this analysis to variable-length inputs is non-trivial, as the Lipschitz constant of self-attention is known to be un-bounded in that regime, and would require a refined analysis of entropy and sequence-length effects (Kim et al., 2021). Finally, increasing the learning rate leads to more localized attention-based attributions in both kernelized and softmax-attention mechanisms (see Figures 3 and 7 to 10). While such localization may be desirable from an interpretability perspective, it can induce attention collapse during training, limiting practical applicability. Designing mechanisms that improve the robustness of attention-based attributions while preserving low-entropy attention maps without collapse is an important direction for future research. From an empirical perspective, our study focuses on con-trolled training-from-scratch settings. Scaling these findings to larger datasets ( e.g ., ImageNet) and pretrained trans-former settings remains an important avenue for future work. Additionally, our experiments suggest that in low-data regimes, controlling robustness of gradient-based attribution is easier than for attention-based attribution Tables 5 and 8, a phenomenon that warrants a systematic investigation. 

## 8. Conclusion 

This work revisits the problem of attribution robustness by integrating recent advances in learning dynamics with a revised theoretical framework considering parameter curva-ture and sharpness. Within this perspective, we empirically showed that implicit curvature regularization (ICR)—arising naturally from SGD dynamics—offers a simple, efficient, and generalizable alternative to post-hoc architectural modi-fications and costly curvature-based regularization–our find-ings and observations are summarized in Table 2. Our analysis showed that ICR improves gradient-based at-tribution robustness across both CNNs and ViTs without altering model architectures or incurring additional compu-tational cost. Also, we found that robustness techniques for gradient-based attributions often do not transfer to attention-based methods due to normalization; replacing softmax with unnormalized kernelized attention with GELU activation enables ICR to improve robustness empirically. Overall, our results show that implicit regularization pro-vides a principled and practical route to improving attri-bution robustness, helping connect explainability research with broader developments in deep learning optimization. 

## Impact Statement 

This paper presents work whose goal is to advance the field of Machine Learning, and in particular explainability of such algorithms. There are many potential societal consequences of our work, none of which we feel must be specifically highlighted here. 

## Acknowledgments 

This project is partially supported by Region Stockholm through MedTechLabs, and Wallenberg AI, Autonomous Systems and Software Program (WASP) funded by the Knut and Alice Wallenberg Foundation. Scientific computation was enabled by the supercomputing resource Berzelius, pro-vided by the National Supercomputer Center at Link ¨oping University and the Knut and Alice Wallenberg foundation. 

## References 

Abnar, S. and Zuidema, W. Quantifying Attention Flow in Transformers. In Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics , 2020. Adebayo, J., Gilmer, J., Muelly, M., Goodfellow, I., Hardt, M., and Kim, B. Sanity Checks for Saliency Maps. In Ad-vances in Neural Information Processing Systems , 2018. Alvarez-Melis, D. and Jaakkola, T. S. On the Robustness of Interpretability Methods, June 2018. arXiv:1806.08049 [cs, stat]. Ancona, M., Ceolini, E., ¨Oztireli, C., and Gross, M. To-wards better understanding of gradient-based attribution methods for Deep Neural Networks. In International Conference on Learning Representations , 2018. Arrieta, A. B., D ´ıaz-Rodr ´ıguez, N., Del Ser, J., Bennetot, A., Tabik, S., Barbado, A., Garc ´ıa, S., Gil-L ´opez, S., Molina, D., Benjamins, R., Chatila, R., and Herrera, F. Explain-able Artificial Intelligence (XAI): Concepts, Taxonomies, Opportunities and Challenges toward Responsible AI. 

Information fusion , 58:82–115, 2020. Avant, T. and Morgansen, K. A. Analytical bounds on the local Lipschitz constants of ReLU networks. IEEE Trans. Neural Networks Learn. Syst. , 2024. Bai, A., Yeh, C.-K., Ravikumar, P., Lin, N. Y. C., and Hsieh, C.-J. Concept Gradient: Concept-based Interpretation Without Linear Assumption. In International Conference on Learning Representations , 2023. Bansal, N., Agarwal, C., and Nguyen, A. SAM: The Sen-sitivity of Attribution Methods to Hyperparameters. In 

Proceedings of the ieee/cvf conference on computer vision and pattern recognition , pp. 8673–8683, 2020. 9Improving Adversarial Robustness of Attribution via Implicit Regularization 

Castin, V., Ablin, P., and Peyr ´e, G. How Smooth Is Atten-tion? In International Conference on Machine Learning ,2024. Chalasani, P., Chen, J., Chowdhury, A. R., Jha, S., and Wu, X. Concise Explanations of Neural Networks using Adversarial Training. In International Conference on Machine Learning , 2020. Chefer, H., Gur, S., and Wolf, L. Transformer Interpretabil-ity Beyond Attention Visualization. In IEEE/CVF Confer-ence on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition , 2021. Chen, C., Guo, C., Ma, G., Zeng, M., Zhang, X., and Xie, S. Robust Ranking Explanations, July 2023. arXiv:2307.04024 [cs]. Chen, J., Wu, X., Rastogi, V., Liang, Y., and Jha, S. Ro-bust Attribution Regularization. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , 2019. Coates, A., Ng, A., and Lee, H. An Analysis of Single-Layer Networks in Unsupervised Feature Learning. In 

Proceedings of the Fourteenth International Conference on Artificial Intelligence and Statistics , pp. 215–223. JMLR Workshop and Conference Proceedings, June 2011. URL https://proceedings.mlr.press/v15/ coates11a.html .Cohen, J. M., Kaur, S., Li, Y., Kolter, J. Z., and Talwalkar, A. Gradient Descent on Neural Networks Typically Occurs at the Edge of Stability. In International Conference on Learning Representations , 2021. Cohen, J. M., Damian, A., Talwalkar, A., Kolter, J. Z., and Lee, J. D. Understanding Optimization in Deep Learning with Central Flows. In International Conference on Learning Representations , 2025. Damian, A., Ma, T., and Lee, J. D. Label Noise SGD Provably Prefers Flat Global Minimizers. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , 2021. Daniely, A., Frostig, R., and Singer, Y. Toward Deeper Understanding of Neural Networks: The Power of Initial-ization and a Dual View on Expressivity. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , 2016. Dasoulas, G., Scaman, K., and Virmaux, A. Lipschitz Nor-malization for Self-Attention Layers with Application to Graph Neural Networks. In International Conference on Machine Learning , 2021. DeYoung, J., Jain, S., Rajani, N. F., Lehman, E., Xiong, C., Socher, R., and Wallace, B. C. ERASER: A Benchmark to Evaluate Rationalized NLP Models. In Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics , 2020. Dherin, B., Munn, M., Rosca, M., and Barrett, D. Why neural networks find simple solutions: The many regu-larizers of geometric complexity. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , 35:2333–2349, 2022. Do Carmo, M. P. Differential geometry of curves and sur-faces: revised and updated second edition . Courier Dover Publications, 2016. Dombrowski, A.-K., Alber, M., Anders, C. J., Ackermann, M., M ¨uller, K.-R., and Kessel, P. Explanations can be manipulated and geometry is to blame. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , 2019. Dombrowski, A.-K., Anders, C. J., M ¨uller, K.-R., and Kessel, P. Towards Robust Explanations for Deep Neural Networks. Pattern Recognition , 121:108194, 2022. Dosovitskiy, A., Beyer, L., Kolesnikov, A., Weissenborn, D., Zhai, X., Unterthiner, T., Dehghani, M., Minderer, M., Heigold, G., Gelly, S., Uszkoreit, J., and Houlsby, N. An Image is Worth 16x16 Words: Transformers for Image Recognition at Scale. In International Conference on Learning Representations , 2021. Foret, P., Kleiner, A., Mobahi, H., and Neyshabur, B. Sharpness-Aware Minimization for Efficiently Improving Generalization. In International Conference on Learning Representations , 2021. Fort, S. and Ganguli, S. Emergent properties of the lo-cal geometry of neural loss landscapes. arXiv preprint arXiv:1910.05929 , 2019. Gamba, M., Azizpour, H., and Bj ¨orkman, M. On the Lip-schitz Constant of Deep Networks and Double Descent. In BMVC , 2023a. Gamba, M., Ghosh, A., Agrawal, K. K., Richards, B. A., Azizpour, H., and Bj ¨orkman, M. On the varied faces of overparameterization in supervised and self-supervised learning. In NeurIPS 2023 Workshop on Symmetry and Geometry in Neural Representations , 2023b. Ghorbani, A., Abid, A., and Zou, J. Interpretation of Neural Networks is Fragile. In AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence , 2019. Gong, S., Dou, Q., and Farnia, F. Structured Gradient-based Interpretations via Norm-Regularized Adversarial Training. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition , pp. 11009– 11018, 2024. Goodfellow, I. J., Shlens, J., and Szegedy, C. Explain-ing and Harnessing Adversarial Examples, March 2015. arXiv:1412.6572 [stat]. 10 Improving Adversarial Robustness of Attribution via Implicit Regularization 

Google Research. google-research/vision transformer. 

https://github.com/google-research/ vision_transformer , December 2025. GitHub repository, Apache-2.0 license. Accessed: 2025-12-23. Gupta, A., Saunshi, N., Yu, D., Lyu, K., and Arora, S. New Definitions and Evaluations for Saliency Methods: Staying Intrinsic, Complete and Sound. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , 2022. Han, D., Pan, X., Han, Y., Song, S., and Huang, G. FLatten Transformer: Vision Transformer using Focused Linear Attention. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF international conference on computer vision , 2023. Haug, J., Z ¨urn, S., El-Jiz, P., and Kasneci, G. On Baselines for Local Feature Attributions, January 2021. arXiv:2101.00905 [cs]. He, K., Zhang, X., Ren, S., and Sun, J. Delving Deep into Rectifiers: Surpassing Human-Level Performance on ImageNet Classification. In IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer Vision , 2015. He, K., Zhang, X., Ren, S., and Sun, J. Deep Residual Learn-ing for Image Recognition. In IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition , 2016. Hendrycks, D. Gaussian error linear units (gelus). arXiv preprint arXiv:1606.08415 , 2016. Heo, J., Joo, S., and Moon, T. Fooling Neural Network In-terpretations via Adversarial Model Manipulation. In Ad-vances in Neural Information Processing Systems , 2019. Hesse, R., Schaub-Meyer, S., and Roth, S. Benchmarking the Attribution Quality of Vision Models. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , 2024. Hoffman, J., Roberts, D. A., and Yaida, S. Robust Learning with Jacobian Regularization, August 2019. Howard, J. Imagenette, 2019. URL https://github. com/fastai/imagenette .Ivankay, A., Girardi, I., Marchiori, C., and Frossard, P. FAR: A General Framework for Attributional Robustness. In 

BMVC , 2021. Jain, S. and Wallace, B. C. Attention is not Explanation. In 

NAACL-HLT , 2019. Jastrzebski, S., Arpit, D., Astrand, O., Kerg, G., Wang, H., Xiong, C., Socher, R., Cho, K., and Geras, K. Catas-trophic Fisher Explosion: Early Phase Fisher Matrix Im-pacts Generalization. In International Conference on Machine Learning , 2021. Kafali, E., Semertzidis, T., and Daras, P. Dynamic trade-offs in adversarial training: Exploring efficiency, robustness, forgetting, and interpretability: E. kafali et al. Neural Processing Letters , 57(3):47, 2025. Kamath, S., Mittal, S., Deshpande, A., and Balasubrama-nian, V. N. Rethinking Robustness of Model Attributions. In Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial In-telligence , 2024. Katharopoulos, A., Vyas, A., Pappas, N., and Fleuret, F. Transformers are RNNs: Fast Autoregressive Transform-ers with Linear Attention. In International Conference on Machine Learning , 2020. Kazmierczak, R., Azzolin, S., Berthier, E., Hedstr ¨om, A., DELHOMME, Bousquet, N., Frehse, G., Mancini, M., Caramiaux, B., Passerini, A., and Franchi, G. Benchmark-ing XAI explanations with human-aligned evaluations, 2025. Kim, H., Papamakarios, G., and Mnih, A. The Lipschitz Constant of Self-Attention. In International Conference on Machine Learning , 2021. Kindermans, P.-J., Hooker, S., Adebayo, J., Alber, M., Sch ¨utt, K. T., D ¨ahne, S., Erhan, D., and Kim, B. The (Un)reliability of saliency methods. Explainable AI ,2019. Koohpayegani, S. A. and Pirsiavash, H. SimA: Simple Softmax-free Attention for Vision Transformers. In Pro-ceedings of the IEEE/CVF Winter Conference on Appli-cations of Computer Vision , pp. 2607–2617, 2024. Krizhevsky, A., Hinton, G., et al. Learning multiple layers of features from tiny images. 2009. Lee, S., Park, J., and Lee, J. Implicit Jacobian regular-ization weighted with impurity of probability output. In Proceedings of the 40th International Conference on Machine Learning , pp. 19141–19184. PMLR, July 2023. URL https://proceedings.mlr.press/ v202/lee23q.html .Li, X., Du, M., Chen, J., Chai, Y., Lakkaraju, H., and Xiong, H. M4: A unified xai benchmark for faithfulness evalua-tion of feature attribution methods across metrics, modal-ities, and models. 2023. Li, X., Xu, Z.-Q. J., and Zhang, Z. Loss Spike in Training Neural Networks. Journal of Computational Mathemat-ics , 2025. doi: 10.4208/jcm.2412-m2024-0083. Li, Y., Zhang, Y., Kawaguchi, K., Khakzar, A., Bischl, B., and Rezaei, M. A Dual-Perspective Approach to Evaluating Feature Attribution Methods. Trans. Mach. Learn. Res. , 2024. 11 Improving Adversarial Robustness of Attribution via Implicit Regularization 

Li, Z., Wang, Z., and Li, J. Analyzing Sharpness along GD Trajectory: Progressive Sharpening and Edge of Stability. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems ,2022. Lim, D., Lee, H., and Kim, S. Building Reliable Explana-tions of Unreliable Neural Networks: Locally Smoothing Perspective of Model Interpretation. In IEEE/CVF Con-ference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition ,2021. Lin, C., Covert, I., and Lee, S.-I. On the Robustness of Removal-Based Feature Attributions. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , 2023. Liu, Y., Li, H., Guo, Y., Kong, C., Li, J., and Wang, S. Re-thinking Attention-Model Explainability through Faith-fulness Violation Test. In International Conference on Machine Learning , 2022. Lu, S., Mills, K. G., He, J., Liu, B., and Niu, D. GOAt: Explaining Graph Neural Networks via Graph Output Attribution. In International Conference on Learning Representations , 2024. Luo, S., Li, S., Cai, T., He, D., Peng, D., Zheng, S., Ke, G., Wang, L., and Liu, T.-Y. Stable, Fast and Accurate: Kernelized Attention with Relative Positional Encoding. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems ,2021. Ma, C. and Ying, L. On Linear Stability of SGD and Input-Smoothness of Neural Networks. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , 2021. Mangla, P., Singh, V., and Balasubramanian, V. N. On Saliency Maps and Adversarial Robustness. In joint Eu-ropean conference on machine learning and knowledge discovery in databases (ECML/PKDD) , 2020. Mehrpanah, A., Englesson, E., and Azizpour, H. On Spectral Properties of Gradient-Based Explanation Meth-ods. In Leonardis, A., Ricci, E., Roth, S., Russakovsky, O., Sattler, T., and Varol, G. (eds.), Computer Vision – ECCV 2024 , pp. 282–299, Cham, 2025a. Springer Na-ture Switzerland. ISBN 9783031730214. doi: 10.1007/ 978-3-031-73021-4 17. Mehrpanah, A., Gamba, M., Smith, K., and Azizpour, H. On the Complexity-Faithfulness Trade-off of Gradient-Based Explanations. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer Vision (ICCV) ,2025b. doi: 10.1109/iccv51701.2025.00337. Mirzadeh, I., Alizadeh, K., Mehta, S., Mundo, C. C. D., Tuzel, O., Samei, G., Rastegari, M., and Farajtabar, M. ReLU Strikes Back: Exploiting Activation Sparsity in Large Language Models. In International Conference on Learning Representations , 2024. Moosavi-Dezfooli, S.-M., Fawzi, A., Uesato, J., and Frossard, P. Robustness via curvature regularization, and vice versa. In IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition , 2019. Mudarisov, T., Burtsev, M., Petrova, T., and State, R. Limi-tations of normalization in attention. In The Thirty-ninth Annual Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems , 2026. URL https://openreview.net/ forum?id=16kX08MCav .Nguyen, G., Kim, D., and Nguyen, A. The effectiveness of feature attribution methods and its correlation with au-tomatic evaluation scores, July 2022. arXiv:2105.14944 [cs]. Nwankpa, C., Ijomah, W., Gachagan, A., and Marshall, S. Activation Functions: Comparison of trends in Prac-tice and Research for Deep Learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:1811.03378 , 2018. Papyan, V. Measurements of Three-Level Hierarchical Structure in the Outliers in the Spectrum of Deepnet Hes-sians. In International Conference on Machine Learning ,2019. Pintore, M. and Despr ´es, B. Computable Lipschitz Bounds for Deep Neural Networks, October 2024. arXiv:2410.21053 [cs]. Poursabzi-Sangdeh, F., Goldstein, D. G., Hofman, J. M., Vaughan, J. W., and Wallach, H. Manipulating and Mea-suring Model Interpretability. In Proceedings of the 2021 CHI conference on human factors in computing systems ,pp. 1–52, 2021. Pruthi, D., Gupta, M., Dhingra, B., Neubig, G., and Lip-ton, Z. C. Learning to Deceive with Attention-Based Explanations. In Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics , 2020. Rong, Y., Leemann, T., Borisov, V., Kasneci, G., and Kas-neci, E. A Consistent and Efficient Evaluation Strategy for Attribution Methods. In International Conference on Machine Learning , 2022. Sagun, L., Evci, U., Guney, V. U., Dauphin, Y., and Bot-tou, L. Empirical Analysis of the Hessian of Over-Parametrized Neural Networks. In International Con-ference on Learning Representations , 2018. Sarkar, A., Sarkar, A., and Balasubramanian, V. N. En-hanced Regularizers for Attributional Robustness. In 

Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelli-gence , volume 35, pp. 2532–2540, 2021. 12 Improving Adversarial Robustness of Attribution via Implicit Regularization 

Selvaraju, R. R., Cogswell, M., Das, A., Vedantam, R., Parikh, D., and Batra, D. Grad-CAM: Visual Explana-tions from Deep Networks via Gradient-based Localiza-tion. pp. 618–626, 2017. Serrano, S. and Smith, N. A. Is Attention Interpretable? In 

Proceedings of the 57th annual meeting of the association for computational linguistics , pp. 2931–2951, 2019. Shrikumar, A., Greenside, P., and Kundaje, A. Learning important features through propagating activation differ-ences. In Precup, D. and Teh, Y. W. (eds.), Proceed-ings of the 34th International Conference on Machine Learning , volume 70 of Proceedings of Machine Learn-ing Research , pp. 3145–3153. PMLR, 06–11 Aug 2017. URL https://proceedings.mlr.press/v70/ shrikumar17a.html .Simonyan, K., Vedaldi, A., and Zisserman, A. Deep Inside Convolutional Networks: Visualising Image Classification Models and Saliency Maps, April 2014. arXiv:1312.6034 [cs]. Singh, S. P., Lucchi, A., Hofmann, T., and Sch ¨olkopf, B. Phenomenology of Double Descent in Finite-Width Neu-ral Networks. In International Conference on Learning Representations , 2022. Singla, S., Wallace, E., Feng, S., and Feizi, S. Understand-ing Impacts of High-Order Loss Approximations and Fea-tures in Deep Learning Interpretation. In International Conference on Machine Learning , 2019. Slack, D., Hilgard, S., Jia, E., Singh, S., and Lakkaraju, H. Fooling LIME and SHAP: Adversarial Attacks on Post hoc Explanation Methods. In Proceedings of the AAAI/ACM Conference on AI, Ethics, and Society , pp. 180–186, 2020. Springenberg, J. T., Dosovitskiy, A., Brox, T., and Ried-miller, M. Striving for Simplicity: The All Convolutional Net, April 2015. arXiv:1412.6806 [cs]. Sulehman, Y. and Mu, T. Scalable Lipschitz Estimation for CNNs, August 2024. arXiv:2403.18613 [cs]. Sundararajan, M., Taly, A., and Yan, Q. Axiomatic Attribu-tion for Deep Networks. In International Conference on Machine Learning , 2017. Tomsett, R., Harborne, D., Chakraborty, S., Gurram, P., and Preece, A. Sanity Checks for Saliency Metrics. In AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence , 2020. Touvron, H., Cord, M., Douze, M., Massa, F., Sablayrolles, A., and J ´egou, H. Training data-efficient image trans-formers & distillation through attention. In International Conference on Machine Learning , 2021. Touvron, H., Cord, M., El-Nouby, A., Verbeek, J., and J ´egou, H. Three things everyone should know about Vi-sion Transformers. In European Conference on Computer Vision , 2022. Tu, L. W. Differential Geometry , volume 275 of 

Graduate Texts in Mathematics . Springer Interna-tional Publishing, Cham, 2017. ISBN 9783319550824 9783319550848. doi: 10.1007/978-3-319-55084-8. URL http://link.springer.com/10.1007/ 978-3-319-55084-8 .Wang, P., Wang, X., Luo, H., Zhou, J., Zhou, Z., Wang, F., Li, H., and Jin, R. Scaled ReLU Matters for Training Vision Transformers. In AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence , 2022. Wang, R. and Manchester, I. R. Direct Parameterization of Lipschitz-Bounded Deep Networks. In International Conference on Machine Learning , 2023. Wang, Z., Wang, H., Ramkumar, S., Fredrikson, M., Mardziel, P., and Datta, A. Smoothed Geometry for Robust Attribution. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , 2020. Wei, Z., Zhu, J., and Zhang, Y. Sharpness-Aware Minimiza-tion Alone can Improve Adversarial Robustness, July 2023. arXiv:2305.05392 [cs]. Wu, B., Xu, C., Dai, X., Wan, A., Zhang, P., Yan, Z., Tomizuka, M., Gonzalez, J., Keutzer, K., and Vajda, P. Visual Transformers: Token-based Image Representa-tion and Processing for Computer Vision. arXiv preprint arXiv:2006.03677 , 2020. Wu, L. and Su, W. J. The Implicit Regularization of Dynam-ical Stability in Stochastic Gradient Descent. In Interna-tional Conference on Machine Learning , 2023. Yang, M. and Kim, B. Benchmarking Attribution Methods with Relative Feature Importance. 2019. Yudin, N., Gaponov, A., Kudriashov, S., and Rakhuba, M. Pay Attention to Attention Distribution: A New Lo-cal Lipschitz Bound for Transformers. arXiv preprint arXiv:2507.07814 , 2025. Zhai, S., Likhomanenko, T., Littwin, E., Busbridge, D., Ramapuram, J., Zhang, Y., Gu, J., and Susskind, J. Sta-bilizing Transformer Training by Preventing Attention Entropy Collapse. In International Conference on Ma-chine Learning , 2023. Zhang, H., Cisse, M., Dauphin, Y. N., and Lopez-Paz, D. mixup: Beyond Empirical Risk Minimization. In Inter-national Conference on Learning Representations , 2018. 13 Improving Adversarial Robustness of Attribution via Implicit Regularization 

Zhu, L., Liu, C., Radhakrishnan, A., and Belkin, M. Cata-pults in SGD: spikes in the training loss and their impact on generalization through feature learning. In Interna-tional Conference on Machine Learning , 2024. Ziyin, L., Liu, K., Mori, T., and Ueda, M. Strength of Minibatch Noise in SGD. In International Conference on Learning Representations , 2022. 14 Improving Adversarial Robustness of Attribution via Implicit Regularization 

## A. Implementation Details 

We include attribution visualizations for a subset of the configurations studied in this paper (see Figures 7 to 10). A more extensive collection of visualizations is provided in a zip archive submitted as part of the supplementary material. For each method of improving attribution robustness, we conducted a grid search over the relevant hyperparameters (such as 

ρ for SAM plus learning rate) to assess their effect on the results. All models were trained using standard data augmentation, including random crops, horizontal flips, and Mixup (Zhang et al., 2018). We share our source code in this GitHub repository for better reproducibility. While Proposition 1 assumes a constant learning rate for analytical tractability, all experiments use an exponential learning rate decay with factor 1 − 10 −3.To ensure a consistent and fair hyperparameter selection, we prioritize models with higher validation accuracy along the accuracy–robustness trade-off, selecting one high–learning-rate configuration (corresponding to ICR) and one base–learning-rate configuration (serving as a non-ICR baseline). The selected hyperparameters are reported in Table 11. 

Base learning rate (BaseLR). We define BaseLR as the reference learning rate used to ensure fair comparisons across methods. For each experiment group, BaseLR is kept fixed while performing a 1D grid search over the auxiliary hyperpa-rameters of each alternative approach (e.g., ρ for SAM). In practice, BaseLR is chosen below the edge-of-stability so that all baseline methods remain trainable, as several alternatives diverge at higher learning rates. As such, BaseLR serves (i) as a common operating point for fairness across methods, (ii) as a reference for optimizing auxiliary hyperparameters, and 

(iii) as a configuration that balances validation accuracy and attribution robustness. We refer to this configuration as Base (denoted by “NoR” before camera-ready version) to emphasize that it corresponds to a baseline learning-rate setting rather than the absence of regularization. Finally, we note that robustness gains are expected to diminish in the presence of a large generalization gap, as several results in SGD theory apply primarily to the training dynamics, and their transfer to test-time robustness depends on the alignment between training and test performance. Matching test accuracy across learning rates is ill-defined, as learning rate itself affects generalization. Moreover, matching test loss is infeasible for post-hoc methods such as PAR and would bias comparisons by penalizing higher-accuracy approaches ( e.g ., ECR, ICR, and ATR) when matched to methods like AAR. Instead, to isolate optimization-induced curvature effects, we match models by training loss and compare curvature and attribution robustness at approximately equal empirical risk. To this end, training is halted when the training loss reaches a certain threshold, with the hyperparameters selected per model–dataset configuration. A warmup phase disables early stopping to ensure stable optimization, and Vision Transformers are trained with a larger budget for the number of epochs due to slower convergence. 

Learning-rate spectrum and edge-of-stability. Empirically, we observe a continuum of behaviors as the learning rate increases. In particular, the implicit bias toward lower-curvature (and lower attribution sensitivity) solutions becomes progressively stronger with increasing learning rate, and is most pronounced near the edge-of-stability—beyond which training diverges. The ICR configurations correspond to operating close to this regime, while “Base” configurations lie in a more conservative, stable region. This spectrum explains the smooth progression in attribution robustness observed across learning rates in our experiments (see Figure 15). 

Early stopping and robustness trade-off. Since stronger implicit regularization near the edge-of-stability may introduce higher optimization noise or slightly degrade validation performance, early stopping acts as a practical mechanism to select a desirable point along the robustness–accuracy spectrum. In particular, stopping earlier in training can mitigate potential drops in validation accuracy while still benefiting from partially developed curvature regularization. Therefore, robustness should be viewed as a controllable property along the training trajectory rather than a single fixed outcome. The behavior of input curvature along training trajectory has been visualized in Figure 4. We also investigated the effect of L2 regularization during training. Although regularization does influence curvature, our results indicate that operating near the edge of stability is by far the dominant factor in governing the curvature. Moreover, while this analysis of ICR provides a principled and lightweight method to improve the robustness of gradient-based attribution, we complement it by investigating how methods designed for enhancing the gradient-based attributions affect the robustness of attention-based attributions. 15 Improving Adversarial Robustness of Attribution via Implicit Regularization 0 20 40 60 80 100   

> Epoch
> 10 3
> 10 2
> Sensitivity ( R)
> Learning Rate
> lr=1e-05
> lr=3e-05
> lr=5e-05

Figure 4. Implicit Curvature Regularization Emerges Early During Training. We visualize attribution sensitivity (a proxy for input curvature) across training for 500 validation samples across different learning rates. Due to computational constraints, this experiment is conducted on a 3-layer MLP trained on MNIST. Points denote raw measurements, while curves are smoothed using a sliding window of size 10. Consistent with our theoretical framework, higher learning rates induce stronger implicit curvature regularization. However, this effect appears well before convergence, supporting the practical relevance of implicit curvature regularization (ICR) beyond the near-convergence regime assumed in Proposition 1 (Assumption (i)). We observe a continuum of behaviors: curvature is progressively reduced as the learning rate increases. This empirically validates that the inductive bias toward low-sensitivity solutions manifests throughout training, rather than only at convergence. 0 20 40 60 80 100 

> Epoch
> 10 0
> SNR
> Learning Rate
> lr=1e-05
> lr=3e-05
> lr=5e-05

Figure 5. Signal-to-Noise Ratio c(x) Increases with Learning Rate Near Convergence. We visualize the signal-to-noise ratio (SNR) defined in Equation (1) across different learning rates, evaluated on 500 validation samples. Due to computational constraints, this experiment is conducted on a 3-layer MLP trained on MNIST. The solid line denotes the mean SNR, while the shaded region captures variability across input samples. We observe that the SNR increases with the learning rate, and the trend is most pronounced in the later stages of training, consistent with the near-convergence regime considered in our analysis. These results provide empirical support for Assumption (iii) in Proposition 1, indicating that higher learning rates induce regimes where the aggregate layer-wise signal dominates noise. This validates the practical relevance of the assumption and its role in explaining the emergence of low-sensitivity solutions. 

Additional experiments using smaller-scale datasets such as STL10, CIFAR10 are also included. For these datasets, we designed proportionally smaller networks to account for their reduced spatial resolution compared to the 224 ×224 input size used for ViT-B/16. The results for smaller datasets generally follow the same trend observed with Imagenette. We observed that the robustness characteristics of different attribution methods are highly correlated. This correlation is illustrated in Figure 13 for the Imagenette dataset. We use a fixed attack configuration with 10 steps, a step size of 0.01 for gradient-based methods and 50 steps of size 0.05 for attention-based approaches as they often lead to smaller numbers. Furthermore, a perturbation radius of 1 is fixed with the input samples preprocessed to have isotropic standard normal distribution. Following (Dombrowski et al., 2022), we used γ = 1 e − 4 for the label consistency in the adversarial loss. This value should be small since the dimensionality of the input space is usually orders of magnitude higher than the number of classes. During the adversarial attacks, we maintain a fixed input norm through iterations, ensuring consistency of input norms across methods. This configuration is held constant across all experiments that are compared in the tables. Although the absolute metric values may vary with attack configuration, the overall trends remain consistent, making consistent settings essential for comparability. 16 Improving Adversarial Robustness of Attribution via Implicit Regularization 

Because attribution an e(x) may lie in a space of low dimensionality— e.g ., GradCAM operates in a lower-dimensional space—we resize all attributions to the input resolution. We then normalize them to unit norm for the angle-based comparison, ensuring that ̸ R reflects directional rather than magnitude variations. Also, as ̸ R quantifies the sensitivity, lower values indicate higher robustness. 

No Activation Replacement at Evaluation. As outlined in Section 3, we compute attributions using negative log-probabilities. This leads to nonzero second-order gradients in ReLU networks, eliminating the need for post-hoc activation changes during evaluation (as used in (Ivankay et al., 2021; Dombrowski et al., 2019)). This simplifies the protocol, improves reproducibility, and more accurately reflects real deployment settings. 

A.1. Differential Learning Rates for Vision Transformers Conservative Learning Rates in Training ViTs. It is well established that ViT architectures require more conservative learning-rate schedules compared to convolutional networks. In particular, best practices for ViTs typically adopt base learning rates an order of magnitude smaller than those used for CNNs, reflecting their increased sensitivity to hyperparame-ters (Wang et al., 2022; Touvron et al., 2021; 2022). We followed this rationale when selecting a base learning rate for the unregularized ViT baseline (denoted as Base in our experiments). 

Training Instability of ViTs. The training instability of ViTs, suggests that naively applying implicit curvature regular-ization (ICR) is impractical for this architectures. Unlike CNNs, applying a single large learning rate η destabilizes ViT training, indicating that tr(H θ ) has grown too large to satisfy the stability condition in Equation (16). 

A Diagnosis of The Instability in Training ViTs. Analyzing the parameter-space Gauss–Newton matrix Gθ ≈ Hθ by partitioning the parameters θ = [ θbb , θ cls ] into the backbone θbb and the classifier head θcls , induces a 2 × 2 block structure: 

Gθ =

Gbb Gbc 

Gcb Gcls 



. (7) The dominant instability arises from the classifier block Gcls = ∇θcls z∇zp∇θcls z⊤. For a linear classifier, ∇θcls z corresponds to the feature embedding h (e.g ., the [CLS] token) produced by the backbone, giving λmax (G cls ) ∝ ∥ h∥2. Since ViTs tend to yield high-norm embeddings (Touvron et al., 2022), Gcls acquires large eigenvalues, inflating ∥ Hθ ∥σ and causing divergence when η is applied uniformly to all parameters. 

Understanding The Consequences of Proposition 2. A direct consequence of Proposition 2 is that the sensitivity of a gradient-based attribution propagating through attention layers scales multiplicatively with the layerwise attention entropies. Since larger learning rates tend to reduce attention entropy, this implies that attribution sensitivity increases with learning rate for both gradient-based and attention-based methods when applied to ViT architectures. A key difference, however, is that for gradient-based attributions the overall sensitivity can be effectively controlled by regularizing only the final layer. In contrast, attention-based attributions are typically computed per layer or aggregated additively across layers, making them inherently sensitive to entropy collapse at any intermediate layer. Consequently, the multiplicative entropy effect cannot be neutralized by controlling a single layer, this guides us on how implicit curvature regularization can be adapted for gradient-based of ViT but not for attention-based attribution. 

A Practical Approach to Stability in Training ViTs. Motivated by this observation, we introduce a differential learning rate scheme that keeps a learning rate ηbb near the edge of stability for the backbone and a smaller base learning rate 

ηcls = ηbase to the classifier head. This is a necessary adaptation of ICR to make it applicable to ViTs. A higher ηbb enhances the robustness and highly localized attributions (see Section D), while a reduced ηcls stabilizes the optimization of Gcls . We refer to this modified approach as ICR †, which retains the beneficial implicit regularization of backbone representations while preventing the instabilities induced by the classifier head. While the differential learning rates are required for stability of the ViTs, we should highlight that the results do not require a hyperparameter search for the ratio. Therefore, we have used 1:10 ratio across all experiments (see Tables 11 and 12). 17 Improving Adversarial Robustness of Attribution via Implicit Regularization Performance (ResNet)    

> Sensitivity Sensitivity
> R/R/
> Applicability
> (ResNet) Performance Complexity
> Base AAR PAR ECR ATR SAM ICR
> (ViT) (ViT)
> Figure 6. Comparative Analysis of Method Rankings. Radar plot summarizing the rankings reported in Table 1, where the outermost radius corresponds to the best rank (1), i.e . larger area is better. ICR achieves a consistent performance across all evaluated criteria. While ECR ranks highest in predictive performance, it does so at a substantially higher computational cost, and PAR leads to a marked degradation in predictive accuracy. For completeness, Table 4 reports average-case robustness metrics for the same methods applied to ResNet50 and ViT-B/16 on Imagenette; under this evaluation, SAM emerges as a competitive alternative to ECR, still, with a large computational cost.

## B. Trade-offs Associated with Kernelized Attention 

Replacing softmax with unnormalized kernelized attention enables ICR to improve attention-based attribution robustness, but it also changes the training and interpretability landscape. Note that this is a drop-in replacement that only uses ϕ(K)ϕ(Q⊤),for some ϕ, instead of Softmax (QK ⊤) and can be implemented by replacing the definition of multi-head attention layer with a custom class. 

Training Stability. Kernel-based attention is more sensitive to data scarcity. On STL-10, where training data is limited, it leads to a larger generalization gap and makes test-time attribution sensitivity harder to control, even when ICR successfully reduces curvature on the training set (see Table 8. In contrast, on CIFAR-10 and Imagenette, kernel-based attention trains as reliably as softmax attention and achieves comparable validation accuracy. In this regime, ICR transfers cleanly to test-time robustness ( Tables 7 and 9). 

Robustness and Interpretability. With softmax attention, Proposition 2 shows that normalization blocks the effect of ICR. Using unnormalized kernels removes this bottleneck. Empirically, kernel-based attention with GELU activation allows learning rate–induced curvature regularization to directly reduce attention-based attribution sensitivity, which is not possible under softmax normalization. Unnormalized kernels also lead to more localized attention maps (compare Figures 7 and 8. As shown in Tables 7 to 9, they reduce average attention entropy compared to softmax, yielding more localized attributions, which are typically easier to interpret. 

Contrast with Temperature Scaling. Temperature scaling provides an alternative way to control attention entropy: increasing the temperature smooths the softmax distribution, which can improve attention-based attrobution robustness by limiting extreme attention weights (as shown in Proposition 2). However, this comes at the cost of interpretability, as high temperatures push attention toward uniform distribution, producing diffuse and uninformative attribution maps. In contrast, removing normalization via kernel-based attention allows robustness to be controlled through learning dynamics without forcing attention to become uniform. A major challenge for using alternative normalization strategies is variable length number of tokens. Moreover, temperature scaling is typically applied post-hoc, which alters the trained model at evaluation time and can degrade predictive performance and faithfulness of the attributions. In this work we therefore focus on ante-hoc methods—such as ECR, SAM, and ICR—that act during training and preserve the integrity of the learned model while shaping attribution robustness. 18 Improving Adversarial Robustness of Attribution via Implicit Regularization 

## C. Derivations and Theoretical Considerations 

C.1. Gradient-based Attribution 

We restate key curvature results from prior work that enable a concise derivation for Proposition 1 in Section 4. 

Gauss-Newton Decomposition of Curvature. Consider the negative log-likelihood 

−lj = LSE( z) − zj . (8) The Hessian with respect to the parameters θ admits the following decomposition: 

Hθ (lj ) = ∇2 

> θ

(LSE( z) − zj ) (9) 

= ∇θ

 p⊤∇θ z − ∇ θ zj

 (10) 

= ∇θ z ∇zp ∇θ z⊤ + X

> k

pk∇2 

> θ

zk − ∇ 2 

> θ

zj (11) 

= G θ + F θ (12) This well-known Gauss–Newton decomposition separates the Hessian into the outer-product Hessian Gθ and the functional Hessian Fθ .Importantly, the above derivation applies verbatim to both parameter-space curvature and input-space curvature, up to the consistent substitution θ ↔ x. This observation underlies our transfer of curvature control from parameters (relevant for curvature analysis) to inputs (relevant for explainability). The term ∇zp in (11) , referred to as the impurity matrix (Lee et al., 2023), is typically locally constant or slowly varying during training. For analytical simplicity, we state subsequent results for the L2 loss, expecting analogous behavior for cross-entropy since the impurity matrix appears in both parameter and input gradients. 

Effect of the Functional Hessian Fθ . The functional Hessian can be rewritten as 

Fθ = X

> k

pk∇2 

> θ

zk − ∇ 2 

> θ

zj (13) 

= X 

> k̸=j

pk∇2 

> θ

zk − (1 − pj )∇2 

> θ

zj . (14) Assuming the network is trained to convergence and attributions are computed for the most probable class, we have pj ≈ 1.Consequently, the contribution of Fθ to the total curvature is negligible, both in parameter and input space. 

Effect of the Outer-Product Hessian Gθ . Extensive empirical and theoretical evidence shows that Gθ provides an accurate approximation of the curvature, with the largest eigenvalues of Hθ typically dominated by Gθ (Singla et al., 2019; Sagun et al., 2018; Fort & Ganguli, 2019; Papyan, 2019; Ziyin et al., 2022). We therefore adopt the Gauss–Newton approximation 

Gθ (Θ ∗) ≈ Hθ (Θ ∗) (15) where Θ∗ = {θ1, . . . , θ L} refers to the set of optimal parameters. 

Implicit Control of Parameter Curvature. Recent works on implicit curvature regularization establish a formal connec-tion between SGD dynamics and curvature control (Cohen et al., 2021; Lee et al., 2023; Wu & Su, 2023; Singh et al., 2022; Cohen et al., 2025). In particular, (Wu & Su, 2023)[Proposition 3.2] shows that, for SGD with a quadratic loss and linearly stable global minima, 

tr(G θ (Θ ∗)) ≤ 2

η , (16) where η is the learning rate and Gθ (Θ ∗) denotes the Gauss–Newton matrix at convergence. Empirically, while training with SGD, tr(G θ (Θ ∗)) closely tracks 2/η as learning rate increases. A closely related result in (Lee et al., 2023)[Prop. 5.2] shows that increasing η implicitly enforces a tighter upper bound on the spectral norm of the Hessian, suppressing high-curvature directions. We work with the trace formulation for analytical convenience. 19 Improving Adversarial Robustness of Attribution via Implicit Regularization 

From Parameter Curvature to Input Curvature. We now relate parameter-space curvature to input-space curvature using the following result. 

Theorem 1 (Parameter Curvature Bounds Input Curvature (Dherin et al., 2022; Gamba et al., 2023a)) . Let f be a neural network with at least one hidden layer, first-layer weights θ1 satisfying ∥θ1∥2 > 0, and remaining (layer-wise) parameters 

Θ = {θ2, . . . , θ l, . . . , θ L}. Then 

c(x)ED

∥∇ xz∥22

 ≤ ED

∥∇ θ z∥2

> F

 , (17) 

where c(x) := 

PLl=1 

> ∥hl−1(x)∥22
> ∥θl∥22∥∇ xhl−1(x)∥22



.

Under the Gauss–Newton approximation for the L2 loss, this yields 

ED [λmax (G x)] ≤ 1

c(x) ED [tr(G θ )] . (18) Note that c(x) is a summation of non-negative terms. Each term of the form ∥hl−1(x)∥22

> ∥∇ xhl−1(x)∥22

can be interpreted as an aggregation of layerwise signal-to-noise ratios. Accordingly, c(x) admits the interpretation of a weighted signal-to-noise ratio across layers. 

Connection: Implicit Input Jacobian Regularization. We now provide a formal justification for Proposition 1 by explicitly combining existing results on the implicit regularization induced by SGD near convergence, and the relationship between parameter-space curvature and input-space smoothness. For this connection we do not need new theoretical claims; rather, we restate the relevant assumptions and show how the cited results compose to yield the stated implication. 

Proposition 1 (Implicit input curvature regularization via SGD) . Let fΘ be a neural network trained by stochastic gradient descent with a constant learning rate η on a fixed dataset and initialization. Assume that (i) training operates in a near-convergence, linearly stable regime, (ii) the loss is twice continuously differentiable in parameters and inputs, and (iii) the layerwise scaled signal-to-noise ratio c(x) is non-decreasing w.r.t. learning rate. Let Θ∗

> 1

, Θ∗ 

> 2

denote the stationary SGD solutions obtained with learning rates η1 < η 2. Then, in the asymptotic regime and in expectation over the stationary SGD distribution, 

E[λmax (Hx(Θ ∗

> 2

))] ≲ E[λmax (Hx(Θ ∗

> 1

))] .

Proof. Using Equation (16), in the stationary SGD regime we have 

E[tr(G θ (Θ ∗ 

> i

))] = 2

ηi

− εl,i , εl,i ≥ 0, (19) where the expectation is taken over the stationary distribution induced by SGD noise (Wu & Su, 2023; Damian et al., 2021). From (17), we further obtain 

E[tr(G θ (Θ ∗ 

> i

))] − ci(x) E[λmax (G x(Θ ∗ 

> i

))] = εg,i , εg,i ≥ 0, (20) where ci(x) denotes the parameter–input curvature coupling constant of (Dherin et al., 2022; Gamba et al., 2023a). Combining (19) and (20) yields 

E[λmax (G x(Θ ∗ 

> i

))] = 1

ci(x)

 2

ηi

− εl,i − εg,i 



. (21) Taking the difference between learning rates η1 < η 2 gives 

∆ = E[λmax (G x(Θ ∗

> 1

))] − E[λmax (G x(Θ ∗

> 2

))] (22) 

= 1

c1(x)

 2

η1

− εl, 1 − εg, 1



− 1

c2(x)

 2

η2

− εl, 2 − εg, 2



. (23) The quantities ci(x), εl,i , and εg,i depend on the learning rate through the stationary SGD distribution and are therefore random variables. The residual terms εl,i and εg,i decrease in expectation as η increases (Gamba et al., 2023a; Wu & Su, 2023). c(x) is a sum of nonnegative layerwise terms, each measuring signal amplitude relative to sensitivity. Assumption (iii) motivates that c(x) is non-decreasing in expectation with respect to the learning rate. Consequently, ∆ is non-negative in expectation for η2 > η 1, which yields the stated expectation-level inequality. 20 Improving Adversarial Robustness of Attribution via Implicit Regularization 

A Discussion on The Scope of Assumptions. Assumption (i) corresponds to the late-training, near-convergence regime where SGD operates close to the edge of stability, as commonly analyzed in prior work on implicit regularization (Wu & Su, 2023; Lee et al., 2023). Assumption (ii) (local smoothness) holds in practice for standard architectures such as CNNs and ViTs when attributions are defined via negative log-probabilities, ensuring twice-differentiability of the loss in a neighborhood of interest. Assumption (iii) is motivated by established results linking training dynamics and curvature: in particular, (Wu & Su, 2023) characterizes the scaling of parameter norms ∥θ∥2 and curvature tr( Gθ (Θ ∗)) in simplified settings, supporting the modeling of c(x) as a non-decreasing function with respect to the learning rate. 

Practical Considerations. It should be emphasized that the argument in Proposition 1 is an expectation-level trend and does not imply a deterministic ordering between individual stationary points obtained at different learning rates. Therefore this argument does not apply to early training, highly unstable regimes, or adaptive optimizers whose noise structure differs from SGD; in such cases, the relationship between learning rate and input curvature may break down. Moreover, as the tightness of the bound in (Gamba et al., 2023a) depends on the final loss value, for near-zero training error, increased learning rates immediately enforce lower input curvature. However, when the loss remains nonzero, a delay may occur before curvature reduction becomes apparent. This shows the necessary condition of being asymptotic in Proposition 1. In practice, we use logarithmically spaced learning rates, making η2 orders of magnitude larger than η1. As a result, the implicit regularization effect is typically observable early in training. 

C.2. Distinct Robustness Behavior of Attention-Based Attribution 

While the robustness properties of gradient-based attribution can be characterized through curvature, it is natural—but ultimately incorrect—to expect analogous behavior for attention-based attribution. In this section, we observe that attention-based methods exhibit a fundamentally different robustness mechanism, rendering curvature-based arguments inapplicable. This discrepancy follows directly from the structural differences between the two attribution paradigms: gradient-based methods depend on local derivatives of the model output, whereas attention-based methods are constrained by normalization and entropy properties of the attention distribution.    

> Figure 7. Visualization of Attention Maps — Kernelized Attention with Base This figure shows last-layer attention heatmaps from a ViT-B/16 trained on Imagenette using kernelized attention without regularization (Base). The left column shows the input image, the middle column the original attention map, and the right column the attention map after an adversarial attack. The learning rate is set according to Base (see Table 12). For consistency, the same normalization constants (vmin, vmax) are used across all attention visualizations (Figures 7 to 10). Compared to ICR †Figure 8, the attention maps are less defined and less sharp, and they exhibit larger changes under adversarial perturbations. This indicates reduced attribution robustness and lower interpretability when implicit curvature regularization is not applied.

Proposition 2 (Minimum Attainable Entropy Bounds Attention-Based Attribution Robustness) . Let Ent min and Ent Unif 

denote the minimum and maximum attainable entropy of an attention layer, respectively. Denote by Ainit the attention scores for a given input, and denote by Aattack the attention scores after an adversarial perturbation. Define the sensitivity of the attention layer as ̸

R (Ainit ) := max 

> Aattack

∥Aattack − Ainit ∥2. (24) 21 Improving Adversarial Robustness of Attribution via Implicit Regularization 

Figure 8. Visualization of Attention Maps — Kernelized Attention with ICR † This figure shows heatmap visualizations of last-layer attention maps from a ViT-B/16 trained on Imagenette with kernelized attention modules. The left column shows the input image, the middle column the original attention map, and the right column the attention map after an adversarial attack. The learning rate is set according to ICR † (see Table 12). For consistency, the same normalization constants (vmin, vmax) are used across all attention visualizations (Figures 7 to 10). The resulting heatmaps are sharper and more concise, indicating improved interpretability. This demonstrates that ICR † not only improves robustness of attention-based attributions but also enhances the clarity of attention maps. Unlike Figure 10, we do not incur training instability with kernelized attention. 

Figure 9. Visualization of Attention Maps — Softmax Attention with Base This figure shows last-layer attention maps from a ViT-B/16 trained with softmax attention and no regularization (Base). The left column shows the input image, the middle column the original attention map, and the right column the attention map after an adversarial attack. The learning rate is set according to Base (see Table 11). For consistency, the same normalization constants (vmin, vmax) are used across all attention visualizations (Figures 7 to 10). The resulting heatmaps are less defined than in all other settings. After adversarial perturbation, attention mass collapses onto a single patch, producing low-entropy and highly unstable attention maps. This highlights the susceptibility of softmax attention to adversarial amplification in the absence of regularization. 

Then ̸ R (Ainit ) is monotonically decreasing w.r.t. Ent min .Proof. Denote the set of attention maps attainable with entropy constraints Ent min and Ent Unif by 

S(Ent min ) := {A : Ent min ≤ Ent( A) ≤ Ent Unif } (25) and the maximum distance between attention maps within this set by 

M



S(Ent min )



:= max  

> A,B ∈S(Ent min )×S(Ent min )

∥A − B∥2. (26) By construction, we know that ̸

R (Ainit ) ≤ M (S(Ent min )) (27) Now consider another attention layer with minimum attainable entropy Ent aux satisfying Ent min ≤ Ent aux . By (25) , we have the set inclusion 

S(Ent aux ) ⊆ S(Ent min ). (28) 22 Improving Adversarial Robustness of Attribution via Implicit Regularization      

> Figure 10. Visualization of Attention Maps — Softmax Attention with ICR †This figure presents attention heatmaps from a ViT-B/16 trained with softmax attention under ICR †. The left column shows the input image, the middle column the original attention map, and the right column the attention map after an adversarial attack. The learning rate is set according to ICR †(see Table 11). For consistency, the same normalization constants (vmin, vmax) are used across all attention visualizations (Figures 7 to 10). The attention maps are more defined than those obtained without regularization (Figure 9), but remain less sharp than kernelized attention with ICR †(Figure 8). Moreover, the changes after the adversarial attack are loss pronounced compared to Base baseline. Note also that while ICR †can improve interpretability for softmax attention, it may come at the cost of reduced attribution robustness and training stability compared to kernelized attention.

Therefore, 

M (S(Ent aux )) ≤ M



S(Ent min )



, (29) which proves that the maximum possible deviation between attention maps decreases monotonically as the minimum attainable entropy increases. In the limiting case where Ent min approaches the entropy of the uniform distribution, the set S(Ent min ) collapses, and the sensitivity measure ̸ R vanishes. We conclude the proof by noting the fact that the bound on the minimum attainable entropy is tight (Zhai et al., 2023, Theorem 3.1). A direct consequence of Proposition 2 is that the sensitivity of gradient-based attributions in attention layers is governed by the multiplicative accumulation of attention entropies across downstream layers, as induced by the chain rule. This perspective is consistent with the findings of (Zhai et al., 2023), which show that training becomes unstable when layerwise entropies collapse. When attention entropies are uniformly low, their product across layers rapidly vanishes, leading to degraded attribution signals and unstable optimization. This observation motivates the use of differentiated learning rates in our ViT training. 

Practical Implications. The above result implies that the robustness of attention-based attribution is governed by entropy constraints on the attention distribution, rather than by curvature of the model output. As a consequence, techniques designed to improve the robustness of gradient-based attributions—such as implicit curvature control—do not transfer to attention-based methods and may even degrade their robustness (see Table 7). This analysis applies to normalized attention mechanisms, such as softmax attention, where attention scores are explicitly constrained to lie on the probability simplex. Intuitively, in this setting, increasing the learning rate affects the scales of the query and key matrices, but the normalization term scales accordingly, canceling the effect on the resulting attention distribution. To circumvent this cancellation, we instead employ an unnormalized, kernelized attention mechanism, which decouples the attention robustness from its entropy constraints and allows learning-rate–induced regularization effects to manifest. It should be noted that using unnormalized scores is not a sufficient, but rather a necessary condition , therefore, the robustness behavior of the attention maps is still dependent on the activation function used with GELU showing a desirable outcome. 23 Improving Adversarial Robustness of Attribution via Implicit Regularization 

## D. On the Effect of Learning Rate on Vision Transformers’ Attribution Localization 

From the explainability perspective, attribution maps with lower entropy are often desirable, as they indicate more focused and interpretable explanations. Interestingly, we observe that increasing the overall learning rate tends to produce such localized attributions, as reflected by the reduction in entropy (see Figure 11 and compare Figures 7 to 10). A related phenomenon was discussed by Zhai et al. (2023), who studied it from a training-stability viewpoint and identified it as attention collapse. Although this connection lies outside the main scope of our study, it highlights a potential direction for future work—balancing interpretability-oriented localization with stable training dynamics. 

## E. The Second Fundamental Form vs . Hessian 

In this section we demonstrate a connection between attribution robustness analyzed by (Dombrowski et al., 2019) as the second fundamental form and by (Ghorbani et al., 2019) as Hessian. Since, the literature on loss landscape curvature primarily focuses on the Hessian, we focused on Hessian in the main text, but it is known in differential geometry that the Hessian and the second fundamental form are equivalent up to normalization (see (Do Carmo, 2016; Tu, 2017) for more background on differential geometry). We define the manifold M locally as the smooth hypersurface embedded in Rn+1 , given by 

M = {ex = ( x, z i) | x ∈ D} ⊂ Rn+1 , (30) where the graph zi = fi(x) corresponds to the projection of f onto its i-th output component. This definition slightly differs from that of Dombrowski et al. (2019) who define the manifold as 

M = {p ∈ Rd | g(p) = c}, (31) where g(x) := g(x)k with k = arg max i g(x)i , i.e ., the most probable class, and g(x) = c represents the corresponding level set. Although these two formulations appear different, they are locally equivalent in terms of their geometric properties. Our version simply embeds the manifold into a higher-dimensional space, which facilitates expressing the Hessian more conveniently. The rationale for this modification is to simplify the notation and subsequent derivations—particularly when the manifold is expressed as the graph of f , for which the computation of second-order derivatives becomes more transparent. We denote by TxM the tangent space to M at a point ex ∈ M as the span of the tangent vectors 

 ∂∂x i

ex = ( ei, ∂∂x i

zi)

ni=1 

, (32) where ei denotes the standard basis of Rn. An arbitrary tangent vector eu ∈ TxM ⊂ Rn+1 can then be written as 

eu =

> n

X

> i=1

u⊤ ∂ex

∂x i

=  u, u⊤∇xzi

 . (33) For brevity, we omit the explicit dependence of eu on x though it is implicitly defined relative to TxM .The surface normal N (x) ∈ Rn+1 is given by 

N (x) = (−∇ xzi, 1) 

p1 + ∥∇ xzi∥2 . (34) Given two tangent vectors eu, ev ∈ TxM , we denote by Dvu the directional derivative of eu along ev, defined via a trajectory 24 Improving Adversarial Robustness of Attribution via Implicit Regularization 

eγ : R → M satisfying γ(0) = x and ddt γ(t) t=0 = v. Taking the time derivative we observe 

Dvu = ddt 

 u, u⊤∇xfi(γ(t)) 

> t=0

(35) 

=



0, u⊤ ddt ∇xfi(γ(t)) 

> t=0



(36) 

=



0, u⊤ ddγ (t) ∇xfi(γ(t)) ddt γ(t)

> t=0



(37) 

=  0, u⊤ Hx fi(x)v , (38) where the chain rule is used in Equation (37). Finally, the second fundamental form , Π : TxM × TxM → R, is defined by 

Π( u, v) = ⟨v, D uN (x)⟩, (39) which is bilinear and symmetric, hence diagonalizable with real eigenvalues {κj ∈ R}nj=1 , referred to as the principal curvatures . Intuitively, the second fundamental form quantifies how the surface normal N (x) changes when moving along the tangent direction of v.Building on the geometric view of Dombrowski et al. (2019), one can reinterpret attribution sensitivity in terms of the input Hessian. We restate their result below, adapting it to our notation (see (Dombrowski et al., 2019), Theorem 1, for the proof). 

Theorem 3 (A Geometric View of Curvature (Dombrowski et al., 2019)) . Let fi : Rn → R be a smooth function ( e.g ., a network with Softplus β activations), and let M = { ex = ( x, f i(x)) : x ∈ D } ⊂ Rn+1 denote its graph manifold. Consider a neighborhood Uϵ(x) = {x′ ∈ Rn : ∥x′ − x∥ < ϵ } of a point x ∈ D such that Uϵ(x) ∩ D is connected and that the gradient magnitude is bounded away from zero, ∥∇ xfi(x′)∥ ≥ c > 0 for all x′ ∈ Uϵ(x) ∩ D . Then, for all x′ ∈ Uϵ(x) ∩ D ,the variation of the attribution map h(x) = ∇xfi(x) satisfies 

∥h(x) − h(x′)∥ ≤ | κmax | dM (x, x′) ≤ β C d M (x, x′), (40) 

where dM (x, x′) denotes the geodesic distance on the manifold M , κmax is the principal curvature with largest absolute value at any point in Uϵ(x), and the constant C > 0 depends on the network weights. 

This result formalizes the geometric interpretation that the sensitivity of an attribution map is governed by the local curvature of the graph manifold M . In particular, since each principal curvature satisfies 

κi = λi

p1 + ∥∇ xzi∥2 . (41) the spectral radius of the input Hessian, ∥ Hx ∥σ , directly bounds the largest curvature |κmax |. Hence, smaller ∥ Hx ∥σ

implies lower curvature and consequently more stable attributions under infinitesimal input perturbations. Expressing the second fundamental form in the eigenbasis of Hx = QΛQ⊤ makes this relationship explicit: 

Π( v, v) = v⊤ Hx v

p1 + ∥∇ xzi∥2 =

Pni=1 λi ˜vi2

p1 + ∥∇ xzi∥2 . (42) where ˜v = Q⊤v. Thus, each principal curvature κj corresponds to a scaled eigenvalue of Hx, and the “worst-case” change in attribution is determined by the largest |κj | which we focus on in this work. 25 Improving Adversarial Robustness of Attribution via Implicit Regularization 

Figure 11. Entropy of Attention Layers Decrease with Learning Rate. This figure shows the mean attention entropy of ViT-B/16 over 500 samples of Imagenette dataset per configuration. We have attention layers on rows and different learning rates on the columns. As the training gets closer to the edge of stability we can see that attention layers exhibit a lower entropy which correspond to more localized and interpretable attention maps—a desirable property from an explainability standpoint. Note that excessively large learning rates can reduce training stability. A more detailed investigation of this trade-off is left for future work. 

Figure 12. Entropy of Attention Layers Across Different Robustness Methods. Mean attention entropy of ViT-B/16 computed over 500 samples from the Imagenette dataset. The y-axis corresponds to attention layers, and the x-axis to different methods for improving the robustness of attribution. Lower entropy indicates more localized attention maps, which generally lead to clearer model interpretations. Explicit curvature regularization (ECR) and implicit curvature regularization with differentiated learning rate (ICR †) yield the most localized attention distributions, though ECR incurs substantially higher computational cost. Other methods exhibit comparable entropy values. See Tables 10 and 11 for details on hyperparameters and loss functions. VanillaGrad                               

> Input*Grad
> IntGrad
> GradCam
> DeepLift
> GuidedBP
> VanillaGrad
> Input*Grad
> IntGrad
> GradCam
> DeepLift
> GuidedBP
> 1.00 0.90 0.62 0.93 0.88 0.62
> 0.90 1.00 0.80 0.92 0.96 0.80
> 0.62 0.80 1.00 0.58 0.89 0.66
> 0.93 0.92 0.58 1.00 0.83 0.66
> 0.88 0.96 0.89 0.83 1.00 0.81
> 0.62 0.80 0.66 0.66 0.81 1.00

(a) (b) (c) Figure 13. Correlation of Sensitivity Metric for Different Attribution Methods. This figure presents the values of ̸ R computed for attribution methods measured for (a) gradient-based ResNet50, (b) gradient-based ViT-B/16, and (b) attention-based ViT-B/16 models trained on Imagenette. As observed, the robustness characteristics of these methods exhibit a high degree of correlation. 

26 Improving Adversarial Robustness of Attribution via Implicit Regularization 

Table 2. Summary of Attribution Robustness Across Architectures and Attribution Methods. This table synthesizes the main theoretical and empirical findings of this work and highlights their practical implications for improving attribution robustness. While the empirical results for ViTs and kernelized attention identify key factors influencing attribution robustness, a deeper theoretical characterization of each configuration is left for future work. 

Architecture Attribution Influenced by Regularized by Discussed in 

Grad-Based Att-Based Input Curv. Layer Ent. 

CNNs/MLPs ✓ ✓ ICR Proposition 1 Tables 3, 5 and 6 and Figures 14 and 15 Softmax Attention 

✓ ✓ ✓ ICR † Section A.1 Tables 3, 5 and 6 

✓ ✓ ✗ Proposition 2 Figure 17 and Tables 7 to 9 Kernelized Attention 

✓ ✓ ICR † Tables 3, 5 and 6 

✓ ✓ ICR † Corollary 1 Figures 16 and 18 and Tables 7 to 9 

Table 3. Effect of Training Strategies on Gradient-Based Attribution Adversarial Sensitivity (Imagenette). Attribution sensitivity, measured by ̸ R (defined in Equation (6)), on Imagenette (224 ×224). We report two-sample t-tests at a 95% confidence level against the unregularized (Base) baseline, using 500 samples per configuration. Results for additional datasets are provided in Table 6. Several methods improve robustness at different computational costs and with potential accuracy trade-offs. Notably, ResNet50 is highly sensitive to activation choice: post-hoc activation replacement (PAR) yields strong robustness gains but can significantly degrade accuracy (see Table 1). We have included the robustness of gradient-based attribution for unnormalized kernelized attention with ViT-B/16 and GELU activation function in the row named “Kern.”. Implicit curvature regularization (ICR) achieves robustness comparable to explicit curvature regularization (ECR) while reducing training cost by approximately 4 ×. These results highlight that robustness improvements often entail trade-offs not captured by ̸ R alone, motivating complementary metrics; Table 1 summarizes the trade-offs among accuracy, robustness, and training time. 

Methods VGrad x⊙Grad IntGrad GradCam DeepLift GuideBP ResNet50 

No Regularization (Base) 0.61 ±0.54 0.12 ±0.06 0.10 ±0.05 0.22 ±0.24 0.10 ±0.07 0.03 ±0.04 

Ante-hoc Act. Reg. (AAR) 0.10 ±0.21 0.03 ±0.05 0.04 ±0.08 0.05 ±0.08 0.04 ±0.08 0.03 ±0.04 

Post-hoc Act. Reg. (PAR) 0.00 ±0.01 0.00 ±0.02 0.00 ±0.00 0.00 ±0.00 0.00 ±0.01 0.00 ±0.01 

Explicit Curv. Reg. (ECR) 0.11 ±0.31 0.04 ±0.07 0.08 ±0.10 0.09 ±0.22 0.04 ±0.07 0.01 ±0.02 

Adv. Trainig Reg. (ATR) 0.21 ±0.29 0.08 ±0.06 0.04 ±0.02 0.15 ±0.19 0.05 ±0.07 0.03 ±0.04 

Sharp. Aware Min. (SAM) 0.30 ±0.54 0.11 ±0.11 0.16 ±0.17 0.12 ±0.17 0.10 ±0.13 0.04 ±0.08 

Implicit Curv. Reg. (ICR) 0.10 ±0.24 0.04 ±0.07 0.05 ±0.06 0.05 ±0.16 0.04 ±0.08 0.01 ±0.03 

> ViT-B/16

No Regularization (Base) 0.11 ±0.05 0.10 ±0.04 0.04 ±0.01 0.06 ±0.04 0.01 ±0.01 0.09 ±0.04 

Ante-hoc Act. Reg. (AAR) 0.07 ±0.04 0.05 ±0.02 0.03 ±0.01 0.04 ±0.03 0.01 ±0.01 0.07 ±0.04 

Post-hoc Act. Reg. (PAR) 0.06 ±0.04 0.04 ±0.02 0.02 ±0.01 0.05 ±0.04 0.00 ±0.01 0.06 ±0.04 

Explicit Curv. Reg. (ECR) 0.08 ±0.08 0.06 ±0.04 0.05 ±0.03 0.09 ±0.11 0.03 ±0.06 0.06 ±0.07 

Adv. Trainig Reg. (ATR) 0.08 ±0.03 0.07 ±0.02 0.02 ±0.01 0.05 ±0.03 0.00 ±0.01 0.06 ±0.03 

Sharp. Aware Min. (SAM) 0.10 ±0.05 0.08 ±0.03 0.04 ±0.01 0.05 ±0.06 0.01 ±0.01 0.10 ±0.04 

Implicit Curv. Reg. (ICR †) 0.07 ±0.04 0.06 ±0.03 0.04 ±0.02 0.03 ±0.03 0.02 ±0.02 0.07 ±0.04 

> Kern.

Implicit Curv. Reg. (ICR †) 0.05 ±0.02 0.04 ±0.02 0.02 ±0.01 0.05 ±0.06 0.02 ±0.02 0.05 ±0.02 

27 Improving Adversarial Robustness of Attribution via Implicit Regularization 

Table 4. Effect of Training Strategies on Gradient-Based Attribution Average Sensitivity (Imagenette). Attribution average sensitivity, measured by ̸ R (defined in Equation (6)), on Imagenette (224 ×224). We report two-sample t-tests at the 95% confidence level against the unregularized (Base) baseline, using 500 samples per configuration. While the theoretical results in Proposition 1 pertain specifically to adversarial robustness, we include robustness to random perturbations as an ablation on the notion of robustness. As shown in the table, the observed trends closely mirror those obtained in the adversarial setting (Table 3). Notably, SAM performs substantially better under average-case robustness compared to the adversarial robustness, which is on par with ICR. Finally, as expected, PAR continues to attain the lowest sensitivity values by sacrificing validation accuracy. 

Methods VGrad x⊙Grad IntGrad GradCam DeepLift GuideBP ResNet50 

No Regularization (Base) 0.23 ±0.03 0.25 ±0.05 0.20 ±0.11 0.01 ±0.00 0.07 ±0.08 0.07 ±0.08 

Ante-hoc Act. Reg. (AAR) 0.15 ±0.19 0.18 ±0.20 0.13 ±0.10 0.03 ±0.12 0.03 ±0.05 0.15 ±0.19 

Post-hoc Act. Reg. (PAR) 0.13 ±0.11 0.17 ±0.16 0.15 ±0.13 0.00 ±0.00 0.13 ±0.11 0.13 ±0.11 

Explicit Curv. Reg. (ECR) 0.15 ±0.16 0.16 ±0.16 0.10 ±0.07 0.03 ±0.13 0.04 ±0.05 0.09 ±0.16 

Adv. Trainig Reg. (ATR) 0.19 ±0.02 0.20 ±0.05 0.14 ±0.08 0.00 ±0.00 0.06 ±0.07 0.05 ±0.06 

Sharp. Aware Min. (SAM) 0.15 ±0.10 0.17 ±0.11 0.11 ±0.06 0.02 ±0.10 0.06 ±0.06 0.21 ±0.22 

Implicit Curv. Reg. (ICR) 0.15 ±0.15 0.17 ±0.15 0.11 ±0.07 0.05 ±0.17 0.04 ±0.05 0.11 ±0.17 

> ViT-B/16

No Regularization (Base) 0.05 ±0.01 0.05 ±0.01 0.01 ±0.00 0.01 ±0.01 0.00 ±0.00 0.05 ±0.01 

Ante-hoc Act. Reg. (AAR) 0.01 ±0.00 0.01 ±0.00 0.00 ±0.00 0.01 ±0.00 0.00 ±0.00 0.01 ±0.00 

Post-hoc Act. Reg. (PAR) 0.01 ±0.00 0.01 ±0.00 0.00 ±0.00 0.00 ±0.00 0.00 ±0.00 0.01 ±0.00 

Explicit Curv. Reg. (ECR) 0.02 ±0.03 0.01 ±0.03 0.01 ±0.00 0.03 ±0.13 0.00 ±0.00 0.01 ±0.03 

Adv. Trainig Reg. (ATR) 0.04 ±0.01 0.04 ±0.01 0.01 ±0.00 0.01 ±0.00 0.00 ±0.00 0.04 ±0.01 

Sharp. Aware Min. (SAM) 0.04 ±0.01 0.04 ±0.01 0.01 ±0.00 0.01 ±0.01 0.00 ±0.00 0.04 ±0.01 

Implicit Curv. Reg. (ICR †) 0.01 ±0.01 0.01 ±0.01 0.01 ±0.00 0.00 ±0.01 0.00 ±0.00 0.01 ±0.00 

Table 5. Effect of Training Strategies on Gradient-Based Attribution Adversarial Sensitivity (STL10). Attribution sensitivity, measured by ̸ R (defined in Equation (6)), on STL10 (96 ×96). We report two-sample t-tests at a 95% confidence level against the unregularized (Base) baseline, using 500 samples per configuration. We have included the robustness of gradient-based attribution for unnormalized kernelized attention with ViT-Tiny and GELU activation function in the row named “Kern.”. Several methods improve robustness at different computational costs and with potential accuracy trade-offs. Unlike larger datasets such as Imagenette—where ICR achieves a favorable trade-off between robustness and computational cost—limited-data regimes such as STL10 prevent ViTs from reliably converging, reflecting their data-hungry nature. As a result, attention-based attribution robustness becomes unpredictable and harder to control in overfitting-prone architectures. Improving the data efficiency of ICR is left for future work. The results on ResNet34 underscore that robustness gains often involve trade-offs not captured by ̸ R alone; Table 1 summarizes the trade-offs among accuracy, robustness, and training time for Imagenette dataset. 

Methods VGrad x⊙Grad IntGrad GradCam DeepLift GuideBP ResNet34 

No Regularization (Base) 0.27 ±0.06 0.28 ±0.09 0.15 ±0.09 0.09 ±0.12 0.10 ±0.08 0.05 ±0.06 

Ante-hoc Act. Reg. (AAR) 0.15 ±0.08 0.18 ±0.13 0.15 ±0.11 0.09 ±0.10 0.07 ±0.06 0.15 ±0.08 

Post-hoc Act. Reg. (PAR) 0.14 ±0.08 0.17 ±0.13 0.14 ±0.11 0.07 ±0.10 0.08 ±0.06 0.14 ±0.08 

Explicit Curv. Reg. (ECR) 0.20 ±0.24 0.20 ±0.25 0.10 ±0.11 0.12 ±0.24 0.04 ±0.06 0.13 ±0.25 

Adv. Trainig Reg. (ATR) 0.18 ±0.06 0.19 ±0.10 0.12 ±0.11 0.04 ±0.06 0.08 ±0.04 0.04 ±0.04 

Sharp. Aware Min. (SAM) 0.16 ±0.18 0.17 ±0.19 0.11 ±0.12 0.08 ±0.18 0.04 ±0.06 0.10 ±0.21 

Implicit Curv. Reg. (ICR) 0.16 ±0.19 0.17 ±0.20 0.09 ±0.09 0.07 ±0.15 0.04 ±0.06 0.12 ±0.24 

> ViT-Tiny ( d = 8 )

No Regularization (Base) 0.69 ±0.28 0.69 ±0.27 0.39 ±0.16 0.38 ±0.17 0.09 ±0.11 0.45 ±0.20 

Ante-hoc Act. Reg. (AAR) 0.69 ±0.26 0.68 ±0.26 0.42 ±0.15 0.60 ±0.26 0.23 ±0.23 0.69 ±0.26 

Post-hoc Act. Reg. (PAR) 0.77 ±0.28 0.75 ±0.27 0.42 ±0.19 0.51 ±0.21 0.10 ±0.15 0.77 ±0.28 

Explicit Curv. Reg. (ECR) 0.65 ±0.27 0.66 ±0.28 0.40 ±0.14 0.39 ±0.17 0.17 ±0.18 0.43 ±0.19 

Adv. Trainig Reg. (ATR) 0.52 ±0.26 0.54 ±0.27 0.26 ±0.10 0.30 ±0.15 0.14 ±0.16 0.41 ±0.21 

Sharp. Aware Min. (SAM) 0.91 ±0.52 0.98 ±0.52 0.64 ±0.31 0.67 ±0.28 0.19 ±0.20 0.61 ±0.21 

Implicit Curv. Reg. (ICR †) 0.65 ±0.27 0.66 ±0.29 0.47 ±0.17 0.53 ±0.24 0.18 ±0.21 0.45 ±0.21 Kern. 

Implicit Curv. Reg. (ICR †) 0.53 ±0.20 0.54 ±0.20 0.34 ±0.14 0.04 ±0.16 0.30 ±0.27 0.53 ±0.20 

28 Improving Adversarial Robustness of Attribution via Implicit Regularization 

Table 6. Effect of Training Strategies on Gradient-Based Attribution Adversarial Sensitivity (CIFAR10). Attribution sensitivity, measured by ̸ R (defined in Equation (6)), on CIFAR10 (32 ×32). We report two-sample t-tests at a 95% confidence level against the unregularized (Base) baseline, using 500 samples per configuration. We have included the robustness of gradient-based attribution for unnormalized kernelized attention with ViT-Tiny and GELU activation function in the row named “Kern.”. Several methods improve robustness at different computational costs and with potential accuracy trade-offs. Compared to larger datasets, adversarial training (ATR) is particularly effective on CIFAR10. These results underscore that robustness gains often involve trade-offs not captured by ̸ R alone; Table 1 summarizes the trade-offs among accuracy, robustness, and training time for Imagenette dataset. 

Methods VGrad x⊙Grad IntGrad GradCam DeepLift GuideBP ResNet18 

No Regularization (Base) 0.35 ±0.26 0.35 ±0.27 0.11 ±0.06 0.27 ±0.32 0.06 ±0.13 0.16 ±0.30 

Ante-hoc Act. Reg. (AAR) 0.08 ±0.06 0.08 ±0.04 0.04 ±0.02 0.06 ±0.09 0.04 ±0.06 0.08 ±0.06 

Post-hoc Act. Reg. (PAR) 0.02 ±0.01 0.03 ±0.01 0.02 ±0.01 0.01 ±0.01 0.03 ±0.01 0.02 ±0.01 

Explicit Curv. Reg. (ECR) 0.57 ±0.36 0.56 ±0.35 0.13 ±0.07 0.55 ±0.40 0.07 ±0.19 0.43 ±0.45 

Adv. Trainig Reg. (ATR) 0.18 ±0.10 0.17 ±0.08 0.07 ±0.02 0.07 ±0.10 0.07 ±0.08 0.02 ±0.01 

Sharp. Aware Min. (SAM) 0.45 ±0.32 0.47 ±0.32 0.13 ±0.09 0.43 ±0.38 0.07 ±0.16 0.34 ±0.41 

Implicit Curv. Reg. (ICR) 0.24 ±0.10 0.23 ±0.12 0.14 ±0.08 0.08 ±0.13 0.13 ±0.21 0.05 ±0.12 

> ViT-Tiny ( d = 6 )

No Regularization (Base) 0.29 ±0.26 0.30 ±0.26 0.10 ±0.08 0.28 ±0.32 0.08 ±0.14 0.21 ±0.25 

Ante-hoc Act. Reg. (AAR) 0.28 ±0.27 0.29 ±0.27 0.09 ±0.07 0.29 ±0.33 0.07 ±0.14 0.28 ±0.27 

Post-hoc Act. Reg. (PAR) 0.28 ±0.27 0.28 ±0.27 0.10 ±0.08 0.29 ±0.33 0.07 ±0.14 0.28 ±0.27 

Explicit Curv. Reg. (ECR) 0.22 ±0.20 0.22 ±0.20 0.09 ±0.07 0.19 ±0.21 0.07 ±0.14 0.22 ±0.20 

Adv. Trainig Reg. (ATR) 0.25 ±0.31 0.26 ±0.31 0.06 ±0.05 0.24 ±0.32 0.05 ±0.10 0.25 ±0.31 

Sharp. Aware Min. (SAM) 0.26 ±0.24 0.26 ±0.24 0.10 ±0.08 0.25 ±0.28 0.08 ±0.15 0.26 ±0.24 

Implicit Curv. Reg. (ICR †) 0.15 ±0.08 0.16 ±0.08 0.11 ±0.09 0.14 ±0.15 0.08 ±0.14 0.15 ±0.08 

> Kern.

Implicit Curv. Reg. (ICR †) 0.22 ±0.10 0.23 ±0.12 0.11 ±0.06 0.10 ±0.26 0.08 ±0.10 0.22 ±0.10 

Table 7. Sensitivity of Attention-Based Attribution in Imagenette; Softmax vs . Unnormalized Kernelized Attention. This table compares the sensitivity of attention-based attribution for ViT-B/16 on Imagenette (224 ×224) under softmax attention and unnormalized kernelized attention with GELU activation, together with the corresponding layer-averaged attention entropy (maximum entropy = 5 .27 ). Robustness is evaluated using two-sample t-tests at a 95% confidence level against the Base baseline, with 500 samples per configuration (see Section A). Under softmax attention, most robustness methods fail to produce the desired outcome—or degrade—attention-based attribution robustness, supporting the observation that techniques developed for gradient-based attribution do not directly transfer. For example ATR, reduces entropy close to its maximum value at uniform entropy to improve robustness. In line with Proposition 2, higher entropy (closer to uniform attention) corresponds to greater robustness, indicating that attention-based attribution is governed by attention entropy rather than curvature. In contrast, replacing softmax with unnormalized kernelized attention enables robustness gains with ICR at minimal additional cost. These gains are observed only with GELU activation. Therefore, AAR and PAR are omitted. Explaining the disparate robustness behavior of closely related activations, such as Softplus and GELU, is left for future work. 

Methods AttRaw AttMean AttRollout AttFlow AttGrad Avg. Ent. 

> ViT-Tiny
> Softmax Attn.

No Regularization (Base) 0.14 ±0.06 0.03 ±0.01 0.12 ±0.09 0.19 ±0.11 0.03 ±0.01 5.26 ±0.02 

Ante-hoc Act. Reg. (AAR) 0.13 ±0.08 0.03 ±0.01 0.11 ±0.09 0.17 ±0.11 0.02 ±0.01 5.27 ±0.01 

Post-hoc Act. Reg. (PAR) 0.12 ±0.06 0.03 ±0.01 0.12 ±0.09 0.18 ±0.12 0.03 ±0.01 5.27 ±0.02 

Explicit Curv. Reg. (ECR) 0.23 ±0.12 0.12 ±0.04 0.30 ±0.09 0.40 ±0.10 0.03 ±0.01 5.02 ±0.15 

Adv. Trainig Reg. (ATR) 0.10 ±0.05 0.02 ±0.01 0.10 ±0.08 0.16 ±0.09 0.03 ±0.01 5.27 ±0.01 

Sharp. Aware Min. (SAM) 0.13 ±0.06 0.03 ±0.01 0.12 ±0.09 0.18 ±0.12 0.03 ±0.01 5.27 ±0.01 

Implicit Curv. Reg. (ICR †) 0.14 ±0.04 0.11 ±0.04 0.35 ±0.11 0.40 ±0.11 0.04 ±0.02 5.03 ±0.09 

> ViT-B/16
> Unnorm. Kern.

No Regularization (Base) 0.47 ±0.46 0.09 ±0.03 0.29 ±0.34 0.17 ±0.05 0.73 ±0.23 4.66 ±0.25 

Explicit Curv. Reg. (ECR) 0.35 ±0.11 0.20 ±0.06 0.85 ±0.54 0.24 ±0.06 0.88 ±0.24 3.67 ±1.41 

Adv. Trainig Reg. (ATR) 0.17 ±0.11 0.09 ±0.02 0.26 ±0.31 0.11 ±0.04 0.62 ±0.22 4.69 ±0.19 

Sharp. Aware Min. (SAM) 0.50 ±0.49 0.08 ±0.03 0.27 ±0.23 0.19 ±0.06 0.69 ±0.26 4.78 ±0.24 

Implicit Curv. Reg. (ICR †) 0.33 ±0.09 0.09 ±0.03 0.17 ±0.08 0.15 ±0.03 1.01 ±0.20 4.22 ±0.84 

29 Improving Adversarial Robustness of Attribution via Implicit Regularization 

Table 8. Sensitivity of Attention-Based Attribution in STL10; Softmax vs . Unnormalized Kernelized Attention. This table reports attention-based attribution sensitivity for ViT-Tiny with softmax attention and with unnormalized kernelized attention using GELU activation, trained on STL10 (96 ×96), together with layer-averaged attention entropy (maximum attainable entropy = 4 .97 ). To ensure entropy is well defined in the unnormalized setting, attention weights are post-processed with softmax at evaluation time. Results are evaluated using two-sample t-tests at a 95% confidence level against the Base baseline, with 500 samples per subset (see Section A). Unlike larger datasets such as Imagenette—where ICR achieves a favorable trade-off between robustness and computational cost—limited-data regimes such as STL10 prevent ViTs from reliably converging, reflecting their data-hungry nature. As a result, attention-based attribution sensitivity becomes unpredictable and harder to control in overfitting-prone architectures. Improving the data efficiency of ICR is left for future work. Robustness gains are observed only with GELU activation (see Figure 18); accordingly, AAR and PAR are omitted. 

Methods AttRaw AttMean AttRollout AttFlow AttGrad Avg. Ent. 

> ViT-Tiny
> Softmax Attn.

No Regularization (Base) 0.23 ±0.08 0.15 ±0.04 0.41 ±0.13 0.45 ±0.12 0.44 ±0.15 4.96 980 

Ante-hoc Act. Reg. (AAR) 0.28 ±0.09 0.17 ±0.04 0.46 ±0.13 0.51 ±0.13 0.56 ±0.15 4.96 980 

Post-hoc Act. Reg. (PAR) 0.19 ±0.06 0.13 ±0.04 0.41 ±0.13 0.46 ±0.13 0.55 ±0.14 4.96 981 

Explicit Curv. Reg. (ECR) 0.29 ±0.15 0.16 ±0.04 0.42 ±0.12 0.46 ±0.13 0.37 ±0.13 4.96 980 

Adv. Trainig Reg. (ATR) 0.21 ±0.12 0.12 ±0.03 0.35 ±0.11 0.38 ±0.12 0.37 ±0.13 4.96 981 

Sharp. Aware Min. (SAM) 0.32 ±0.11 0.27 ±0.06 0.76 ±0.15 0.76 ±0.15 0.51 ±0.13 4.96 980 

Implicit Curv. Reg. (ICR †) 0.31 ±0.12 0.17 ±0.04 0.44 ±0.11 0.47 ±0.11 0.47 ±0.17 4.96 980 

> ViT-Tiny
> Unnorm. Kern.

No Regularization (Base) 0.04 ±0.24 0.03 ±0.01 0.12 ±0.18 0.08 ±0.05 0.69 ±0.19 4.9 6854 

Explicit Curv. Reg. (ECR) 0.02 ±0.16 0.03 ±0.01 0.11 ±0.15 0.09 ±0.05 0.70 ±0.23 4.9 6853 

Adv. Trainig Reg. (ATR) 0.00 ±0.00 0.02 ±0.01 0.10 ±0.14 0.06 ±0.04 0.60 ±0.18 4.9 6843 

Sharp. Aware Min. (SAM) 0.00 ±0.01 0.04 ±0.01 0.17 ±0.23 0.07 ±0.05 0.61 ±0.19 4.9 6790 

Implicit Curv. Reg. (ICR †) 0.01 ±0.07 0.08 ±0.11 0.61 ±0.42 0.10 ±0.08 1.22 ±0.15 4.9 5782 

Table 9. Sensitivity of Attention-Based Attribution in CIFAR10; Softmax vs . Unnormalized Kernelized Attention. This table reports the sensitivity of attention-based attribution for ViT-Tiny with softmax-attention vs . kernelized attention layers and GELU activation, trained on CIFAR10 (32 ×32) along with their corresponding attention entropy averaged over layers. In this configuration the maximum attainable entropy is 4.159 . To ensure entropy is well defined in unnormalized case, attention weights are post-processed with softmax at evaluation time. Results are assessed using t-tests with a 95% confidence interval against the Base baseline, with 500 samples per subset (see Section A). Compared to softmax-attention, kernelized attention enables robustness gains with ICR at minimal additional cost. As this behavior is only seen with GELU activation, we have not included AAR and PAR. 

Methods AttRaw AttMean AttRollout AttFlow AttGrad Avg. Ent. 

> ViT-Tiny
> Softmax Attn.

No Regularization (Base) 0.91 ±0.23 0.59 ±0.11 0.70 ±0.14 0.80 ±0.12 1.01 ±0.16 4.1588 264 

Ante-hoc Act. Reg. (AAR) 0.99 ±0.24 0.60 ±0.11 0.69 ±0.13 0.79 ±0.12 1.06 ±0.14 4.1588 330 

Post-hoc Act. Reg. (PAR) 0.86 ±0.24 0.53 ±0.10 0.70 ±0.14 0.78 ±0.12 1.08 ±0.16 4.1588 330 

Explicit Curv. Reg. (ECR) 0.01 ±0.01 0.44 ±0.15 0.73 ±0.12 0.79 ±0.14 0.99 ±0.19 4.1588 316 

Adv. Trainig Reg. (ATR) 0.96 ±0.18 0.62 ±0.10 0.54 ±0.11 0.78 ±0.08 0.91 ±0.17 4.1588 287 

Sharp. Aware Min. (SAM) 0.00 ±0.00 0.32 ±0.09 0.75 ±0.16 0.79 ±0.16 0.89 ±0.18 4.1588 073 

Implicit Curv. Reg. (ICR †) 0.00 ±0.00 0.34 ±0.09 0.77 ±0.16 0.80 ±0.16 0.85 ±0.15 4.1588 078 

> ViT-Tiny
> Unnorm. Kern.

No Regularization (Base) 0.52 ±0.45 0.29 ±0.12 0.85 ±0.40 0.36 ±0.11 1.14 ±0.22 4.12 ±0.02 

Explicit Curv. Reg. (ECR) 0.27 ±0.13 0.20 ±0.05 0.43 ±0.21 0.31 ±0.09 1.07 ±0.14 3.55 ±0.14 

Adv. Trainig Reg. (ATR) 0.27 ±0.30 0.23 ±0.08 0.87 ±0.44 0.30 ±0.10 1.05 ±0.18 4.14 ±0.01 

Sharp. Aware Min. (SAM) 0.17 ±0.27 0.25 ±0.22 0.74 ±0.39 0.15 ±0.18 1.21 ±0.16 4.09 ±0.03 

Implicit Curv. Reg. (ICR †) 0.25 ±0.33 0.18 ±0.05 0.74 ±0.38 0.26 ±0.06 1.22 ±0.14 3.91 ±0.20 

30 Improving Adversarial Robustness of Attribution via Implicit Regularization 

Table 10. Practical approaches to gradient-based attribution robustness. This table shows the alternatives to robust gradient-based attribution. Methods are grouped by their target (input vs. parameter Hessian) and by whether they regularize curvature explicitly or implicitly. We also include a summary of the loss or the regularization term in the regularized loss defined as in Section 6.2 

Strategy Target Domain Regularization Type Regularization Term 

No Regularization (Base) - - -Ante-hoc Activation Reg. (AAR) (Dombrowski et al., 2022) Input/Param. Explicit (via act. func.) -Post-hoc Act. Reg. (PAR) (Dombrowski et al., 2019) Input/Param. Explicit (via act. func.) -Implicit Curv. Reg. (ICR) (Lee et al., 2023) Param. Implicit (via EoS) -Explicit Curv. Reg. (ECR) (Hoffman et al., 2019) Input Explicit (via Ω) Ω = ∥∇ xy⊤l∥2

Adversarial Training Reg. (ATR) (Chalasani et al., 2020) Input Explicit (via Ω) Ω = L  max ∥δ∥≤ ε L(x + δ, y), y

Sharpness-Aware Min. (SAM) (Foret et al., 2021) Param. Implicit (via noise) min Θ Ex∼D 

max ∥δ∥2≤ρ L(fΘ+ δ , x, y)0.005 0.01 0.1 0.3 0.5 0.7 0.9 1.0 1.1 1.3 1.5 Learning Rate AAR ( = 1)                                                                                                  

> AAR ( = 3)
> AAR ( = 5)
> AAR ( = 7)
> / ICR Base / PAR ( = 7)
> PAR ( = 5)
> PAR ( = 3)
> PAR ( = 1)
> 0.10 0.09 0.25 0.15 0.19 0.22 0.21 0.20 0.00 0.20 0.28 0.18 0.13 0.11 0.23 0.17 0.24 0.40 0.21 0.27 0.19 0.28 0.17 0.19 0.17 0.22 0.14 0.31 0.30 0.13 0.33 0.23 0.45 0.17 0.14 0.25 0.27 0.17 0.18 0.21 0.34 0.26 0.32 0.31 0.61 0.44 0.17 0.10 0.10 0.11 0.11 0.23 0.32 0.14 0.29 0.10 0.08 0.12 0.09 0.21 0.08 0.37 0.66 0.58 0.60 0.55 0.04 0.03 0.08 0.01 0.07 0.05 0.10 0.40 0.24 0.26 0.36 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.05 0.05 0.05 0.03 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00

Figure 14. A Closer Look at the Mean Robustness of PAR and AAR for ResNet50. This figure compares post-hoc activation regularization (PAR) and ante-hoc activation regularization (AAR) in greater detail by varying the smoothing parameter β. We report ̸

R for a ResNet50 model trained on Imagenette. The results indicate that retraining the network to improve task performance does not consistently enhance robustness. Notably, large learning rates correspond to implicit curvature regularization (ICR), which effectively reduces ̸ R, while small learning rates correspond to unregularized training (Base), exhibiting reduced adversarial robustness. The means are computed over 500 Imagenette samples using VanillaGrad attributions. Interestingly, for β = 7 , robustness decreases—an effect that warrants further theoretical investigation which is left as future work. Learning rates were increased up to the point where SGD training diverged; overall, there appears to be an optimal range of learning rates, as excessively large values lead to higher mean robustness estimates. 

31 Improving Adversarial Robustness of Attribution via Implicit Regularization 

Table 11. Table of Hyperparameters. table of hyperparameters used for training sessions. We used zero L2 regularization across all experiments. We use an exponential learning rate decay of 1 − 10 −3 for all experiments. We have used a ICR † to denote the differential learning rates discussed in Section A. We have used parenthesis on values of PAR to emphasize that the values are post-hoc change to the original network (Base). For CIFAR10 and STL10, we use, ViT-Tiny (Touvron et al., 2021), a smaller variant of ViT suitable for datasets of lower resolution. We use different depths of attention layers for ViT-Tiny which is shown by d in each configuration. 

Strategy LR Act. Func. Reg. params. 

> Imagenette (224 ×224)
> ResNet50

No Regularization (Base) 0.005 ReLU -

Ante-hoc Activation Reg. (AAR) 0.005 SoftPlus β = 1 .0

Post-hoc Act. Reg. (PAR) (0.005) (SoftPlus) β = 1 .0

Explicit Curv. Reg. (ECR) 0.005 ReLU λ = 0 .1

Adversarial Training Reg. (ATR) 0.005 ReLU ε = 0 .0001 

Sharpness-Aware Min. (SAM) 0.005 ReLU ρ = 0 .07 

Implicit Curv. Reg. (ICR) 0.5 ReLU -ViT-B/16 

No Regularization (Base) 0.001 ReLU -

Ante-hoc Activation Reg. (AAR) 0.001 GELU -

Post-hoc Act. Reg. (PAR) (0.001) (GELU) -

Explicit Curv. Reg. (ECR) 0.001 ReLU λ = 0 .1

Adversarial Training Reg. (ATR) 0.001 ReLU ε = 0 .001 

Sharpness-Aware Min. (SAM) 0.001 ReLU ρ = 0 .01 

Implicit Curv. Reg. (ICR †) 0.1/0.01 ReLU -STL10 (96 ×96) ResNet34 

No Regularization (Base) 0.001 ReLU -

Ante-hoc Activation Reg. (AAR) 0.001 SoftPlus β = 1 .0

Post-hoc Act. Reg. (PAR) (0.001) (SoftPlus) β = 1 .0

Explicit Curv. Reg. (ECR) 0.001 ReLU λ = 0 .001 

Adversarial Training Reg. (ATR) 0.001 ReLU ε = 0 .001 

Sharpness-Aware Min. (SAM) 0.001 ReLU ρ = 0 .07 

Implicit Curv. Reg. (ICR) 0.1 ReLU -ViT-Tiny ( d = 8 ) No Regularization (Base) 0.05 ReLU -

Ante-hoc Activation Reg. (AAR) 0.05 GELU -

Post-hoc Act. Reg. (PAR) (0.05) (GELU) -

Explicit Curv. Reg. (ECR) 0.05 ReLU λ = 0 .001 

Adversarial Training Reg. (ATR) 0.05 ReLU ε = 0 .001 

Sharpness-Aware Min. (SAM) 0.05 ReLU ρ = 0 .07 

Implicit Curv. Reg. (ICR †) 0.1/0.01 ReLU -CIFAR10 (32 ×32) ResNet18 

No Regularization (Base) 0.005 ReLU -

Ante-hoc Activation Reg. (AAR) 0.005 SoftPlus β = 1 .0

Post-hoc Act. Reg. (PAR) (0.005) (SoftPlus) β = 1 .0

Explicit Curv. Reg. (ECR) 0.005 ReLU λ = 0 .1

Adversarial Training Reg. (ATR) 0.005 ReLU ε = 0 .001 

Sharpness-Aware Min. (SAM) 0.005 ReLU ρ = 0 .1

Implicit Curv. Reg. (ICR) 0.5 ReLU -ViT-Tiny ( d = 6 ) No Regularization (Base) 0.05 ReLU -

Ante-hoc Activation Reg. (AAR) 0.05 GELU -

Post-hoc Act. Reg. (PAR) (0.05) (GELU) -

Explicit Curv. Reg. (ECR) 0.001 ReLU λ = 0 .001 

Adversarial Training Reg. (ATR) 0.05 ReLU ε = 0 .01 

Sharpness-Aware Min. (SAM) 0.05 ReLU ρ = 0 .05 

Implicit Curv. Reg. (ICR †) 0.3/0.03 ReLU -32 Improving Adversarial Robustness of Attribution via Implicit Regularization 

Table 12. Table of Hyperparameters (Unnormalized Kernelized Attention). Act./Att. Func shows the activations used for attention layers and MLP layers. We used zero L2 regularization across all experiments. We use an exponential learning rate decay of 1 − 10 −3

for all experiments. We have used a ICR † to denote the differential learning rates discussed in Section A. For CIFAR10 and STL10, we use, ViT-Tiny (Touvron et al., 2021), a smaller variant of ViT suitable for datasets of lower resolution. We use different depths of attention layers for ViT-Tiny which is shown by d in each configuration. we have not included PAR and AAR in this table as unnormalized kernelized attention is very sensitive to the choice of GELU (see Figure 18 for the ablation). Further investigation of why very similar activation functions such as Softplus and GELU lead to strikingly different robustness behaviors is left for future work. 

Strategy LR Act./Att. Func. Reg. params. 

> Imagenette
> ViT-B/16
> Unnormalized

No Regularization (Base) 0.001 GELU/GELU -

Explicit Curv. Reg. (ECR) 0.001 GELU/GELU λ = 0 .1

Adversarial Training Reg. (ATR) 0.001 GELU/GELU ε = 0 .001 

Sharpness-Aware Min. (SAM) 0.001 GELU/GELU ρ = 0 .01 

Implicit Curv. Reg. (ICR †) 0.1/0.01 GELU/GELU -

> STL10
> ViT-Tiny ( d = 8 )
> Unnormalized

No Regularization (Base) 0.001 GELU/GELU -

Explicit Curv. Reg. (ECR) 0.001 GELU/GELU λ = 0 .01 

Adversarial Training Reg. (ATR) 0.001 GELU/GELU ε = 0 .001 

Sharpness-Aware Min. (SAM) 0.001 GELU/GELU ρ = 0 .02 

Implicit Curv. Reg. (ICR †) 0.03/0.003 GELU/GELU -

> CIFAR10
> ViT-Tiny ( d = 6 )
> Unnormalized

No Regularization (Base †) 0.02/0.002 GELU/GELU -

Explicit Curv. Reg. (ECR †) 0.001/ 1e − 4 GELU/GELU λ = 1 e − 8

Adversarial Training Reg. (ATR †) 0.02/0.002 GELU/GELU ε = 0 .01 

Sharpness-Aware Min. (SAM †) 0.02/0.002 GELU/GELU ρ = 0 .05 

Implicit Curv. Reg. (ICR †) 0.07/0.007 GELU/GELU -10 2 10 1 10 0

> Learning Rate
> 0.00
> 0.01
> 0.02
> 0.03
> 0.04
> 0.05
> 0.06
> 0.07
> Grads Norm
> 0.0
> 0.1
> 0.2
> 0.3
> 0.4
> 0.5
> 0.6
> 0.7
> 0.8
> 0.9
> Sensitivity ( R) or  Validation Accuracy
> Grads Norm Mean
> Sensitivity ( R)
> Validation Accuracy

Figure 15. Accuracy–Sensitivity Trade-offs on Imagenette/ResNet50. This figure reports validation accuracy and gradient-based attribution sensitivity (measured according to Equation (6) on VanillaGrad using 500 samples per configuration) for ResNet50 trained on Imagenette. While, increasing the learning rate may not affect validation accuracy, it reduces the norm of gradients and sensitivity of gradient-based attribution. This phenomenon is the effect of implicit curvature regularization in parameter space in input space as shown in Proposition 1. 

33 Improving Adversarial Robustness of Attribution via Implicit Regularization 0.02 0.03 0.04 0.05 0.06 0.07 0.08 0.09 

> Learning Rate
> 0.1
> 0.2
> 0.3
> 0.4
> 0.5
> 0.6
> 0.7
> 0.8
> 0.9
> Sensitivity ( R)
> 0.68
> 0.69
> 0.70
> 0.71
> 0.72
> 0.73
> 0.74
> 0.75
> Validation Accuracy
> AttRaw Mean
> Val Acc

Figure 16. Accuracy–Sensitivity Trade-offs on CIFAR10/Unnormalized Kernelized Attention. This figure reports validation accuracy and attention-based attribution sensitivity (measured according to Equation (6) on the raw attention of the final layer using 500 samples per configuration) for ViT-Tiny with unnormalized kernelized attention and GELU activation trained on CIFAR10. Increasing the learning rate simultaneously improves validation accuracy and robustness. Note that as accuracy approaches saturation under softmax attention, higher curvature—and thus reduced attribution robustness—is expected but as we see in this plot the effect of ICR † is stronger than the increase in curvature due to saturation in softmax and the combined effect is improving robustness by decreasing sensitivity. 

(a) (b) (c) (d) 

(e) (f) (g) (h) Figure 17. Layerwise Attention Entropy and Sensitivity in ViTs with Softmax-Attention. This figure shows the relationship between the deviation of attention entropy from that of the uniform distribution (Distance to Uniform Entropy), learning rate (top row), and robustness (bottom row) for a standard ViT-B/16 with softmax attention, trained on Imagenette. We are visualizing 500 samples per learning rate in this figure. Aligned with Figure 11, higher learning rates yield larger distance to uniform entropy (top row). As we show theoretically in Proposition 2, the bottom row illustrates that greater deviation from uniform attention corresponds to higher sensitivity ̸

R. The trend is very similar for normalized kernelized attention, with different activation functions, therefore, we have not included normalized visualizations to avoid redundancy. Since Proposition 2 pertains specifically to normalized attention, we additionally evaluate unnormalized kernelized attention variants under the same setup to examine how their robustness behavior varies with learning rate (see Figures 18 to 22). 

34 Improving Adversarial Robustness of Attribution via Implicit Regularization 

(a) (b) (c) (d) 

(e) (f) (g) (h) Figure 18. Layerwise Attention Entropy and Sensitivity in ViTs with Unnormalized Kernelized Attention (GELU Activation). 

This figure shows the relationship between the deviation of attention entropy from that of the uniform distribution (Distance to Uniform Entropy), learning rate (top row), and robustness (bottom row) for a linear ViT-B/16 with GELU activation, trained on Imagenette. We are visualizing 500 samples per learning rate in this figure. Similar to Figure 17, higher learning rates yield larger distance to uniform entropy (top row). However, different from Figure 17, in the bottom row we observe that greater deviation from uniform attention corresponds to a 

lower sensitivity ̸ R. To investigate the sensitivity of this observation w.r.t. the choice of activation function, we also repeat this experiment for other activation functions (see Figures 19 to 22 for ReLU, SoftPlus, ELU+1 and cosine similarity). Our ablation study on the activation functions for kernelized attention reveals that the relationship between attention-based attribution robustness and learning rate (the second row) is sensitive to the choice of activation function with a desirable outcome happening for GELU. We conjecture that such sensitivity is caused by the spectral biases of the implicit kernel induced by each activation function (Mehrpanah et al., 2025b), a deeper analysis of the causes of this sensitivity is left as future work. 

35 Improving Adversarial Robustness of Attribution via Implicit Regularization 

(a) (b) (c) (d) 

(e) (f) (g) (h) Figure 19. Ablation; Layerwise Attention Entropy and Sensitivity in ViTs with Unnormalized Kernelized-Attention (Cosine Similarity). This figure shows the relationship between the deviation of attention entropy from that of the uniform distribution (Distance to Uniform Entropy), learning rate (top row), and robustness (bottom row) for a unnormalized kernelized attention version of ViT-B/16 with L2 norm as activation, trained on Imagenette. We are visualizing 500 samples per learning rate in this figure. Using L2 norm for Q and K leads to the cosine similarity of Q and K matrices, which is similar to (Koohpayegani & Pirsiavash, 2024)–but note that the attention map will still be unnormalized. Similar to Figure 17, higher learning rates yield larger distance to uniform entropy (top row) at a smaller scale, meaning that the attention maps are generally very close to the uniform distribution. In the bottom row we observe that greater deviation from uniform attention corresponds to higher sensitivity ̸ R. Comparing this with Figure 18, we realize that the robustness of attention-based attribution for ViTs with kernelized attention modules is sensitive to the choice of activation function .

36 Improving Adversarial Robustness of Attribution via Implicit Regularization 

(a) (b) (c) (d) 

(e) (f) (g) (h) Figure 20. Ablation; Layerwise Attention Entropy and Sensitivity in ViTs with Unnormalized Kernelized-Attention (ELU+1 Activation). This figure shows the relationship between the deviation of attention entropy from that of the uniform distribution (Distance to Uniform Entropy), learning rate (top row), and robustness (bottom row) for a linear ViT-B/16 with ELU (x)+1 activation, trained on Imagenette. We are visualizing 500 samples per learning rate in this figure. Similar to Figure 17, higher learning rates yield larger distance to uniform entropy (top row). In the bottom row we observe that greater deviation from uniform attention corresponds to higher sensitivity ̸

R. Comparing this with Figure 18, we realize that the robustness of attention-based attribution for ViTs with unnormalized kernelized attention modules is sensitive to the choice of activation function .

37 Improving Adversarial Robustness of Attribution via Implicit Regularization 

(a) (b) (c) (d) 

(e) (f) (g) (h) Figure 21. Ablation; Layerwise Attention Entropy and Sensitivity in ViTs with Unnormalized Kernelized-Attention (ReLU Activation). This figure shows the relationship between the deviation of attention entropy from that of the uniform distribution (Distance to Uniform Entropy), learning rate (top row), and robustness (bottom row) for a linear ViT-B/16 with RELU activation, trained on Imagenette. We are visualizing 500 samples per learning rate in this figure. Similar to Figure 17, higher learning rates yield larger distance to uniform entropy (top row). In the bottom row we observe that greater deviation from uniform attention corresponds to higher sensitivity ̸

R. Comparing this with Figure 18, we realize that the robustness of attention-based attribution for ViTs with kernelized attention modules 

is sensitive to the choice of activation function .

38 Improving Adversarial Robustness of Attribution via Implicit Regularization 

(a) (b) (c) (d) 

(e) (f) (g) (h) Figure 22. Ablation; Layerwise Attention Entropy and Sensitivity in ViTs with Unnormalized Kernelized-Attention (SoftPlus( β=3.0) Activation). This figure shows the relationship between the deviation of attention entropy from that of the uni-form distribution (Distance to Uniform Entropy), learning rate (top row), and robustness (bottom row) for a linear ViT-B/16 with SoftPlus (β) := 1 

> β

ln(exp( βx ) + 1) activation, trained on Imagenette. We are visualizing 500 samples per learning rate in this figure. Similar to Figure 17, higher learning rates yield larger distance to the uniform entropy (top row). In the bottom row we observe that greater deviation from uniform attention corresponds to higher sensitivity ̸ R. Comparing this with Figure 18, we realize that the robustness of attention-based attribution for ViTs with kernelized attention modules is sensitive to the choice of activation function .

39