Title: When Denoising Becomes Unsigning: Theoretical and Empirical Analysis of Watermark Fragility Under Diffusion-Based Image Editing

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2603.04696v1

Published Time: Fri, 06 Mar 2026 01:21:17 GMT

Number of Pages: 21

Markdown Content:
# When Denoising Becomes Unsigning: Theoretical and Empirical Analysis of Watermark Fragility Under Diffusion-Based Image Editing 

Fai Gu Qiyu Tang Te Wen Emily Davis Finn Carter 

Xidian University 

# Abstract 

Robust invisible watermarking systems aim to em-bed imperceptible payloads that remain decodable after common post-processing such as JPEG com-pression, cropping, and additive noise. In parallel, diffusion-based image editing has rapidly matured into a “default” transformation layer for modern content pipelines, enabling instruction-based edit-ing, object insertion and composition, and interac-tive geometric manipulation. This paper studies a subtle but increasingly consequential interac-tion between these trends: diffusion-based edit-ing procedures may unintentionally compromise, and in extreme cases practically bypass, robust watermarking mechanisms that were explicitly engineered to survive conventional distortions. We develop a unified view of diffusion editors— including training-free composition methods such as TF-ICON, recent FLUX-based insertion frame-works such as SHINE, and drag-based editors such as DragFlow—as stochastic operators that (i) inject substantial Gaussian noise in a latent space and (ii) project back to the natural image manifold via learned denoising dynamics. Un-der this view, watermark payloads behave as low-energy, high-frequency signals that are systemati-cally attenuated by the forward diffusion step and then treated as nuisance variation by the reverse generative process. We formalize this degrada-tion using information-theoretic tools, proving that for broad classes of pixel-level watermark en-coders/decoders the mutual information between the watermark payload and the edited output de-cays toward zero as the editing strength increases, yielding decoding error close to random guess-ing. We complement the theory with a realis-tic hypothetical experimental protocol and tables spanning representative watermarking methods (StegaStamp, TrustMark, and VINE) and repre-sentative diffusion editors (TF-ICON, SHINE, DragFlow, and strong instruction-based edits). Fi-nally, we discuss ethical implications, responsible disclosure norms, and concrete design guidelines for watermarking schemes that remain meaning-ful in the era of generative transformations. 

# 1. Introduction 

Digital watermarking is a cornerstone of content prove-nance, copyright enforcement, and authenticity workflows. Modern invisible watermarking systems are designed to em-bed a secret payload into an image such that the resulting watermarked image is perceptually indistinguishable from the original, while the payload can be recovered after com-mon post-processing and manipulations (Zhu et al., 2018; Tancik et al., 2020; Luo et al., 2020; Bui et al., 2023). His-torically, robustness has been evaluated against a family of relatively “low-level” perturbations and signal process-ing operations: JPEG compression, resizing, pixel noise, mild blurring, cropping, and combinations thereof. This robustness regime is now incomplete. Diffusion models (Ho et al., 2020; Song et al., 2020; Rom-bach et al., 2022) have enabled a new generation of image editing systems that are effectively generative transforma-tions : the edited output is not merely a post-processed ver-sion of the input, but rather a re-synthesized image that matches high-level constraints (instruction, mask, reference subject, or geometric drags) while re-projecting intermedi-ate representations onto the learned natural-image manifold. Instruction-based editors such as InstructPix2Pix (Brooks et al., 2023) can enact global semantic changes with mini-mal user input; inversion-based methods enable controlled edits to a given real image (Kawar et al., 2023; Mokady et al., 2023); interactive systems such as DragDiffusion (Shi et al., 2024) and DragonDiffusion (Mou et al., 2024) pro-vide geometric manipulation via optimization in diffusion latents; and recent training-free composition pipelines such as TF-ICON (Lu et al., 2023), SHINE (Lu et al., 2025b), and DragFlow (Zhou et al., 2025c) exploit increasingly strong priors (including diffusion transformers) to insert and move objects with high fidelity. These methods expand the space of practical image modifications in a way that is only loosely captured by classical distortion models. 1

> arXiv:2603.04696v1 [cs.CR] 5 Mar 2026 Title Suppressed Due to Excessive Size

Recent security-oriented work has raised alarms that invisi-ble watermarks can be removed (or at least rendered unde-codable) by regeneration-style attacks based on generative models (Zhao et al., 2024; Ni et al., 2025a; Fu et al., 2025a). At a high level, such attacks inject noise and then reconstruct an image using a denoiser or a generative model, thereby destroying low-level watermark features while preserving the image’s semantics. Concurrently, the community has proposed watermarking schemes that explicitly leverage dif-fusion priors for robustness, such as VINE (Lu et al., 2024b) and latent-space watermarking methods (Zhang et al., 2024; Gunn et al., 2024). Despite these advances, the editing 

setting introduces new failure modes: watermarks can be ac-cidentally compromised as a byproduct of ordinary creative edits, without any explicit intent to remove the watermark. This paper provides a theoretical and empirical-style analy-sis of watermark fragility under diffusion-based image edit-ing processes. Our goal is not to provide operational instruc-tions for removing watermarks, but rather to understand the mechanism of failure and to propose constructive guidelines for robust watermark design and deployment. We focus on three families of diffusion editors that represent mod-ern pipelines and correspond to the requested emphasis: (i) training-free composition (TF-ICON (Lu et al., 2023)); (ii) insertion and harmonized composition with strong DiT/flow priors (SHINE (Lu et al., 2025b)); and (iii) interactive drag-based editing with region supervision in DiTs (DragFlow (Zhou et al., 2025c)). We study their interaction with repre-sentative watermark encoders/decoders spanning classical deep watermarking (HiDDeN (Zhu et al., 2018)), physically robust embedding (StegaStamp (Tancik et al., 2020)), and recent universal high-resolution watermarking (TrustMark (Bui et al., 2023; 2025))—as well as diffusion-prior water-marking (VINE (Lu et al., 2024b)). 

Contributions. Our main contributions are: (i) We formal-ize diffusion-based image editing pipelines as stochastic op-erators that combine additive-noise corruption and manifold projection, and we identify which steps are most damaging to pixel-level watermarks. (ii) We develop an information-theoretic model and provide proofs showing that watermark payload information contracts under diffusion editing, yield-ing decoding error approaching random guessing under mild assumptions. (iii) We propose a reproducible experimental protocol and provide realistic hypothetical tables measuring watermark robustness and visual fidelity across multiple watermarking and diffusion-editing methods. (iv) We syn-thesize the implications into actionable design guidelines for resilient watermarking, and we discuss ethical consider-ations around evaluation, disclosure, and deployment. 

# 2. Related Work 

2.1. Diffusion-based image editing 

Diffusion models have become a dominant paradigm for high-quality image synthesis and enable controllable gener-ation through conditioning and guidance (Ho et al., 2020; Song et al., 2020; Rombach et al., 2022; Ho & Salimans, 2022). Adapting these models for editing real images has produced several families of methods. Inversion-based ap-proaches map an image into a diffusion latent (or noise) rep-resentation and then resample conditioned on an edit prompt; representative methods include Imagic (Kawar et al., 2023) and Null-text Inversion (Mokady et al., 2023). Instruction-based editors such as InstructPix2Pix (Brooks et al., 2023) train a conditional diffusion model on synthetic instruction pairs and can perform fast edits without per-image optimiza-tion. Interactive editing further extends diffusion workflows: DragDiffusion (Shi et al., 2024) and DragonDiffusion (Mou et al., 2024) optimize diffusion latents to achieve point-level or feature-correspondence-based geometric manipulation. Recent work also emphasizes training-free editing and com-position, where a powerful pretrained model is used with minimal (or zero) fine-tuning. TF-ICON (Lu et al., 2023) achieves cross-domain image-guided composition by lever-aging inversion strategies and attention injection, while SHINE (Lu et al., 2025b) exploits the stronger priors of modern diffusion transformers and flow matching to per-form physically plausible insertion with high fidelity without inversion. DragFlow (Zhou et al., 2025c) argues that DiT feature geometry makes prior point-wise drag objectives ineffective, and introduces region-based supervision and adapter-enhanced inversion to achieve state-of-the-art drag editing in DiTs. 

2.2. Robust invisible watermarking and deep learning-based schemes 

Classical watermarking uses frequency-domain or spread-spectrum designs to embed signals resilient to common distortions, but modern systems increasingly rely on deep networks to jointly optimize imperceptibility, capacity, and robustness (Zhu et al., 2018; Tancik et al., 2020; Luo et al., 2020; Ren et al., 2025). HiDDeN (Zhu et al., 2018) demon-strates end-to-end training of an encoder and decoder with differentiable distortion layers. StegaStamp (Tancik et al., 2020) focuses on robustness under printing and recapture by training against realistic photometric and geometric dis-tortions. Distortion-agnostic training, as in (Luo et al., 2020), uses adversarial training and channel coding to im-prove generalization to unknown distortions. TrustMark (Bui et al., 2023; 2025) introduces architectural and spatio-spectral losses for universal watermarking across resolutions and provides a paired watermark-removal network for re-watermarking workflows. 2Title Suppressed Due to Excessive Size 

2.3. Watermark robustness against generative transformations 

As generative models became effective at image-to-image transformations, the community began to question whether image watermarks remain meaningful against regeneration 

attacks. Zhao et al. show that invisible pixel-level water-marks can be provably removed using generative AI via a family of regeneration attacks (Zhao et al., 2024). Subse-quent diffusion-specific analyses and methods demonstrate that diffusion-based editing and regeneration can severely degrade watermark detectability (Ni et al., 2025a; Fu et al., 2025a; Ni et al., 2025b). Complementarily, several works attempt to exploit diffusion models to improve watermark robustness, e.g., by embedding in a diffusion latent space (Zhang et al., 2024) or by leveraging cryptographic cod-ing in latent initialization (Gunn et al., 2024). VINE (Lu et al., 2024b) explicitly studies robustness against editing and proposes surrogate distortions and diffusion priors for embedding. 

2.4. Benchmarks for diffusion editing and watermark robustness 

As diffusion editing diversified, several benchmarks emerged to quantify edit fidelity, identity preservation, and controllability. EditVal (Basu et al., 2023) provides a stan-dardized protocol for text-guided edit evaluation across mul-tiple edit types and highlights that many editors struggle with spatial transformations, a failure mode directly rele-vant to whether a watermark survives geometric or localized edits. More broadly, surveys such as (Huang et al., 2024) categorize diffusion editors by supervision type (text, mask, exemplar, geometry) and by whether they rely on inversion, test-time optimization, or direct feed-forward editing. On the watermarking side, W-Bench (introduced with VINE) explicitly evaluates watermarking schemes against a spec-trum of modern editing operators rather than only classical distortions (Lu et al., 2024b). Community stress tests such as the NeurIPS “Erasing the Invisible” challenge (Ding et al., 2024) and the subsequent winning attack report (Shamshad et al., 2025) further illustrate that watermark robustness should be understood empirically against adaptive and gen-erative transformations, not only against fixed corruption models. 

Concept erasure in diffusion models. Concept erasure in diffusion models is tightly connected to this paper’s topic because both concept erasure and watermark preservation hinge on how information is injected, suppressed, or pre-served along the denoising trajectory; editing-time inter-ventions that erase semantic concepts can also erase (or distort) watermark-carrying signals as a side effect. MACE (Lu et al., 2024a) scales concept removal to many con-cepts via cross-attention refinement and LoRA-based up-dates; ANT (Li et al., 2025a) proposes trajectory-aware fine-tuning that steers mid-to-late denoising stages while preserving early-stage score fields; and EraseAnything (Gao et al., 2024; 2025) targets rectified-flow transformer mod-els with bilevel optimization and attention regularization. While these works focus on suppressing undesired con-cepts, their mechanisms—attention manipulation, guidance reweighting, and trajectory steering—overlap structurally with both diffusion editing controls and potential watermark-destroying dynamics. This proximity suggests a broader systems concern: safety-driven modifications to diffusion pipelines may inadvertently impact watermark reliability, and watermark-driven controls may conflict with safety-driven trajectory edits. 

# 3. Methodology 

3.1. Problem setting 

Let x ∈ RH×W ×3 be a clean image (pixel values normal-ized to [0 , 1] ), and let m ∈ { 0, 1}B denote a B-bit payload. A watermarking scheme consists of an encoder E and de-coder D:

˜x = E(x, m ; k), (1) 

ˆm = D(y; k), (2) where k is a secret key (or secret parameters) shared between encoder and decoder. We assume imperceptibility: ˜x is visually close to x under standard metrics (e.g., PSNR (Hor ´e& Ziou, 2010), SSIM (Wang et al., 2004), and LPIPS (Zhang et al., 2018)). We assume robustness to a conventional distortion family τ ∼ T , e.g., JPEG, resize, crop, Gaussian noise: 

P [D(τ (˜ x); k) = m] ≥ 1 − ϵ. (3) In this paper, we study robustness under diffusion-based 

editing operators T :

y = T (˜ x; c, ω ), (4) where c encodes user intent (text instruction, mask, refer-ence image, drag constraints) and ω denotes stochasticity (random seed, diffusion noise, stochastic sampling). Ex-amples include TF-ICON composition (Lu et al., 2023), SHINE insertion (Lu et al., 2025b), and DragFlow drag editing (Zhou et al., 2025c). 

3.2. Diffusion editing as a two-stage stochastic channel 

Most diffusion editing pipelines (including inversion-based, optimization-based, and training-free variants) can be ab-stracted as the composition of: (i) an encoding/noising stage that injects noise into an intermediate representation, and (ii) a denoising/projection stage that maps back to an image on the learned manifold. 3Title Suppressed Due to Excessive Size 

For concreteness, consider a latent diffusion workflow (Rombach et al., 2022). Let z0 = Enc(˜ x) be a latent encod-ing. A forward diffusion step to time t produces 

zt = √¯αt z0 + √1 − ¯αt ε, ε ∼ N (0 , I ), (5) where ¯αt is the cumulative noise schedule (Ho et al., 2020). An editor then applies a reverse process with conditioning 

c (and optionally additional optimization or guidance) to produce ˆz0. Finally, y = Dec(ˆ z0).We conceptually separate the editing operator into a Markov kernel: 

˜x Enc 

−−−→ z0Noise t

−−−−−→ zt

> Denoise c

−−−−−−→ ˆz0Dec 

−−−→ y. (6) Even when Denoise c is highly content-preserving in a per-ceptual sense, it is not constrained to preserve low-energy, high-frequency perturbations that encode watermark pay-loads. Indeed, the learned denoiser is trained to remove 

noise-like signals; a well-designed invisible watermark re-sembles such signals by construction. 

3.3. A signal model for watermark attenuation 

A broad empirical observation in deep watermarking is that the watermark is implemented as a small perturbation δ:

˜x = x + δ(x, m ; k), (7) where ∥δ∥ is small to preserve imperceptibility. In latent space, under a first-order approximation of Enc around x,we can write 

z0(˜ x) ≈ z0(x) + Jxδ, (8) where Jx is the local Jacobian. The forward diffusion step scales the perturbation by √¯αt:

zt(˜ x) − zt(x) ≈ √¯αt Jxδ. (9) Meanwhile, the injected noise has variance (1 − ¯αt) per dimension. Thus a simple signal-to-noise ratio (SNR) proxy at time t is 

SNR( t) ≜ ¯αt∥Jxδ∥2

(1 − ¯αt) d , (10) where d is the latent dimensionality. For the noise levels used in many editing pipelines (which often correspond to moderate-to-high t to allow semantic change), ¯αt can be small and (1 − ¯αt) large, pushing SNR toward zero. In this regime, the watermark perturbation becomes statistically indistinguishable from the diffusion noise. 

3.4. Pipeline-specific considerations: TF-ICON, SHINE, DragFlow 

While the abstract channel view is shared, specific editing methods instantiate the components differently. 

TF-ICON. TF-ICON (Lu et al., 2023) performs training-free cross-domain composition by inverting real images into diffusion latents and injecting modified attention maps during denoising. Two aspects are relevant: inversion in-troduces explicit noising and reverse denoising (potentially multiple steps), and attention manipulation reweights se-mantic and spatial feature propagation. Both can disrupt watermark perturbations even when the composed output is visually faithful. 

SHINE. SHINE (Lu et al., 2025b) emphasizes non-inversion latent preparation, performing a one-step forward diffusion to obtain a noisy latent, and then optimizing it us-ing a Manifold-Steered Anchor loss and auxiliary guidance terms. The explicit one-step diffusion injects substantial Gaussian noise, potentially at higher resolution and with stronger transformer priors, and the subsequent trajectory steering can further “regularize away” watermark-consistent but visually irrelevant features. 

DragFlow. DragFlow (Zhou et al., 2025c) introduces region-based supervision and adapter-enhanced inversion for drag editing in DiT models. Like other optimization-based drag editors, it iteratively optimizes noisy latents to satisfy geometric constraints, which can shift local frequency content and interaction patterns. Importantly, DragFlow is designed for strong generative priors and thus tends to aggressively project intermediate latents onto the natural-image manifold, a process that can suppress water-mark signals that do not correspond to semantically mean-ingful content. 

3.5. A taxonomy of diffusion editing operations and watermark failure modes 

Diffusion-based editing is not a single operator but a family of procedures that combine a base generative model with task-specific control. To reason about watermark fragility, it is helpful to decompose editors along three axes that influence information preservation. 

Axis A: where noise is injected. Some editors inject noise in pixel space (e.g., image-to-image diffusion pipelines), while latent diffusion editors inject noise in a compressed VAE latent (Rombach et al., 2022). SHINE explicitly per-forms a one-step forward diffusion in a flow-matching latent (Lu et al., 2025b), while many inversion-based editors con-struct a noisy latent by iterative inversion (DDIM-style) (Mokady et al., 2023). From a watermark perspective, the key quantity is the effective SNR at the injection point; injecting noise after semantic compression can erase high-frequency watermark components even more aggressively. 4Title Suppressed Due to Excessive Size 

Axis B: how much the model is asked to “create”. Ed-its range from near-identity adjustments (low noise, small prompt change) to high-entropy generation (high noise, strong instruction, or large masked regions). Methods de-signed for composition, such as TF-ICON and SHINE, often require the model to hallucinate boundary regions, shadows, reflections, and texture harmonization (Lu et al., 2023; 2025b). These operations are semantically meaning-ful but can overwrite subtle signals that do not align with the model’s explanatory factors. 

Axis C: whether the editor optimizes latents. 

Optimization-based editors (DragDiffusion, DragFlow, DragonDiffusion) iteratively optimize latent variables to satisfy geometric constraints (Shi et al., 2024; Zhou et al., 2025c; Mou et al., 2024). This introduces an additional mechanism for watermark disruption: gradients induced by edit constraints can move latents toward regions where the watermark decoder’s decision boundary is unstable, even if the final image is perceptually similar. Training-free methods without optimization can still erase watermarks through noising and denoising, but optimization can exacerbate brittleness. Across these axes, we identify three practical failure modes that recur in watermark evaluations: (i) SNR collapse (for-ward noise overwhelms the watermark carrier), (ii) mani-fold projection (the reverse process discards nuisance per-turbations), and (iii) control-induced redistribution (atten-tion/adapter guidance concentrates probability mass on se-mantically salient factors, unintentionally washing away or-thogonal signals). Our theoretical results connect primarily to (i) and (ii), while our experimental protocol (Algorithm 1) is designed to reveal (iii) empirically. 

3.6. Evaluation protocol and reproducibility goals 

Our evaluation goal is to measure two things simultaneously: (i) watermark survival (bit accuracy or detection score), and (ii) visual fidelity of the edited output relative to a non-watermarked edit. This is essential because it is not meaningful to “remove” a watermark by destroying the image. We therefore define two paired runs under the same editing condition c and random seed ω:

ywm = T (E(x, m ; k); c, ω ), (11) 

yclean = T (x; c, ω ). (12) We evaluate the recovered payload ˆm = D(ywm ; k) and compute visual similarity between ywm and yclean (not be-tween ywm and x) to isolate watermark-induced artifacts from editing-induced changes. 

Algorithm 1 Diffusion-edit watermark stress test (protocol used in) 

Require: Dataset of clean images {xi}Ni=1 , payload length 

B, watermark encoder/decoder (E, D ) with key k,set of editing operators Tedit , edit conditions C (text prompts, masks, drags), random seeds Ω

Ensure: Watermark robustness metrics and watermark-induced fidelity metrics  

> 1:

for i ← 1 to N do  

> 2:

Sample payload mi ∼ Unif( {0, 1}B ) 

> 3:

˜xi ← E(xi, m i; k) 

> 4:

for all T ∈ T edit do  

> 5:

for all c ∈ C (T ) do  

> 6:

for all ω ∈ Ω do  

> 7:

y(i)wm ← T (˜ xi; c, ω ) 

> 8:

y(i)clean ← T (xi; c, ω ) 

> 9:

ˆmi ← D(y(i)wm ; k) 

> 10:

Compute bit accuracy BA i ←

> 1
> B

PBb=1 1[ ˆ mi,b = mi,b ] 

> 11:

Compute fidelity metrics 

PSNR( y(i)wm , y (i)clean ), SSIM( ·), LPIPS( ·) 

> 12:

end for  

> 13:

end for  

> 14:

end for  

> 15:

end for  

> 16:

Aggregate robustness and fidelity statistics across im-ages, conditions, and seeds 

# 4. Experimental Setup 

4.1. Scope and disclaimer on results 

The experimental section is written in a fully specified, re-producible style, but the numerical results are hypothetical 

and are intended to be realistic given trends reported in prior work on diffusion-based watermark removal and bench-marking (Zhao et al., 2024; Ni et al., 2025a; Fu et al., 2025a; Lu et al., 2024b). This choice follows the instruction to include hypothetical tables while maintaining a credible ex-perimental structure. We emphasize that the protocol can be executed with public implementations of the cited methods. 

4.2. Datasets and preprocessing 

We define W-E DIT BENCH as a union of common natural-image sources used in watermarking and editing evaluation: (i) MS-COCO val2017 (5k images) for natural scenes, and (ii) a 5k-image subset of a large text-to-image dataset (e.g., DiffusionDB) to represent AI-generated or captioned im-ages. All images are resized such that the shorter side is 512 pixels and center-cropped to 512 ×512. 5Title Suppressed Due to Excessive Size 

4.3. Watermarking methods 

We evaluate three representative watermarking approaches emphasized in the prompt: StegaStamp (Tancik et al., 2020) as a physically robust neural watermark trained on realistic distortions; TrustMark (Bui et al., 2023; 2025) as a univer-sal watermark for arbitrary resolutions with strong robust-ness claims; and VINE (Lu et al., 2024b) as a diffusion-prior watermarking method explicitly trained against editing-like surrogate distortions. For completeness, we also report results for HiDDeN (Zhu et al., 2018) as a widely cited baseline. All methods embed a B = 100 bit payload unless other-wise stated. For methods with lower default capacity (e.g., StegaStamp’s original design), we map our 100-bit payload into the method’s supported capacity via error-correcting coding; this setting is consistent with robust watermarking practice (Luo et al., 2020). 

4.4. Diffusion-based editing methods 

We evaluate diffusion editing in four categories: (i) Compo-sition/insertion: TF-ICON (Lu et al., 2023) and SHINE (Lu et al., 2025b); (ii) Drag-based editing: DragFlow (Zhou et al., 2025c) (region drag on DiT priors) and DragDiffusion (Shi et al., 2024) (UNet-based drag editing) as a reference point; (iii) Instruction editing: InstructPix2Pix (Brooks et al., 2023) for global semantic edits; (iv) Regeneration-style editing: a simple image-to-image diffusion pipeline consistent with the regeneration attacks studied in (Zhao et al., 2024; Fu et al., 2025a). Each editor has an edit strength hyperparameter, often im-plemented as a noise level, timestep, or guidance scale. We discretize the strength into three bins: Low , Medium , High ,chosen to reflect (a) minor semantic adjustments, (b) typical editing, and (c) aggressive transformation. 

4.5. Metrics Watermark robustness. We report mean bit accuracy (BA, in %) and a detection-style metric TPR@0 .1%FPR for methods that output confidence scores. For methods that output bits only, we derive a detection score from aggregate bit agreement. 

Fidelity. We compare the watermark-embedded edit ywm 

against the clean edit yclean with PSNR (Hor ´e & Ziou, 2010), SSIM (Wang et al., 2004), and LPIPS (Zhang et al., 2018). 

# 5. Results 

5.1. Baseline robustness under conventional distortions 

We first report robustness under conventional, non-generative distortions to contextualize the “robustness gap” 

Table 1. Hypothetical robustness under conventional distortions on W-E DIT BENCH (512 ×512). BA is bit accuracy in %. Higher is better. Method JPEG (Q=50) Resize (0.6 ×) Crop (0.8 area) Blur ( σ=1 .0)HiDDeN (Zhu et al., 2018) 96.8% 97.5% 94.2% 93.1% StegaStamp (Tancik et al., 2020) 97.9% 98.2% 95.6% 94.4% TrustMark (Bui et al., 2023) 99.1% 99.3% 97.8% 96.9% VINE (Lu et al., 2024b) 99.4% 99.5% 98.6% 97.5% 

induced by diffusion editing. Table 1 shows that all methods achieve high bit accuracy under JPEG, resize, crop, and mild blur, consistent with their design goals (Tancik et al., 2020; Bui et al., 2023; Lu et al., 2024b). These strong results can be misleading if one assumes that “robustness” generalizes to diffusion editing. 

5.2. Watermark survival under diffusion-based editing 

Table 2 summarizes watermark survival under diffusion-based editing across the requested diffusion editors. Two consistent patterns emerge. First, even low-strength edits can significantly degrade wa-termark decoding , especially for watermarking schemes optimized for classical distortions (HiDDeN, StegaStamp, TrustMark). This is consistent with the regeneration-attack literature (Zhao et al., 2024; Ni et al., 2025a; Fu et al., 2025a). Second, robustness improvements from diffusion-aware de-signs are real but limited . VINE is consistently more robust than baselines under editing, but under medium-to-high edit-ing strength its bit accuracy approaches chance (near 50% for bits), aligning with reports that sufficiently strong diffu-sion edits can bypass even diffusion-prior watermarking (Ni et al., 2025a;b). 

5.3. Fidelity of watermark-preserving versus watermark-breaking edits 

To disentangle “watermark failure because the image is destroyed” from “watermark failure despite preserved con-tent”, we report watermark-induced differences between 

ywm and yclean . Table 3 indicates that, across editors, the watermark has only a marginal effect on the edited output (high PSNR, high SSIM, low LPIPS). Thus, watermark de-coding failures under diffusion editing can occur even when the edited output is essentially the same with or without the watermark, suggesting that the editing operator is removing a watermark-like component while preserving semantics. 

5.4. Watermark survival curves versus noise level 

Our theory suggests that the forward diffusion noise level is a primary driver of watermark information loss (Equa-tion (10)). Table 4 reports a hypothetical survival curve for the simplest regeneration-style editor, parameterized by the 6Title Suppressed Due to Excessive Size 

Table 2. Hypothetical watermark robustness under diffusion-based editing on W-E DIT BENCH (BA in %). “Low/Med/High” correspond to increasing editing strength. Chance BA is 50%. Method TF-ICON (Lu et al., 2023) SHINE (Lu et al., 2025b) DragFlow (Zhou et al., 2025c) InstructPix2Pix (Brooks et al., 2023) Low Med High Low Med High Low Med High Low Med High HiDDeN (Zhu et al., 2018) 74.1% 56.8% 50.9% 71.5% 55.4% 50.3% 69.2% 54.7% 50.1% 78.3% 60.2% 51.5% StegaStamp (Tancik et al., 2020) 79.6% 58.1% 51.2% 76.8% 56.2% 50.4% 73.5% 55.0% 50.2% 82.7% 62.1% 52.0% TrustMark (Bui et al., 2023) 84.8% 60.5% 52.0% 82.9% 59.2% 51.1% 79.1% 57.3% 50.6% 86.0% 64.4% 53.2% VINE (Lu et al., 2024b) 90.2% 69.1% 54.8% 88.7% 67.5% 53.6% 86.4% 65.9% 52.8% 90.8% 71.2% 55.7% 

Table 3. Hypothetical fidelity between watermarked and clean edited outputs, averaged over W-E DIT BENCH and edit conditions. Metrics compare ywm vs. yclean . Higher PSNR/SSIM and lower LPIPS are better. Method TF-ICON SHINE DragFlow InstructPix2Pix PSNR ↑ LPIPS ↓ PSNR ↑ LPIPS ↓ PSNR ↑ LPIPS ↓ PSNR ↑ LPIPS ↓

StegaStamp 42.8 0.012 42.5 0.013 41.9 0.015 43.1 0.011 TrustMark 43.6 0.010 43.3 0.011 42.7 0.013 43.8 0.010 VINE 44.1 0.009 43.9 0.010 43.1 0.012 44.3 0.009 

Table 4. Hypothetical BA (%) under regeneration-style diffusion editing as a function of noise strength. Method tmax =0 .20 tmax =0 .35 tmax =0 .50 tmax =0 .65 

StegaStamp 85.2% 63.4% 52.1% 50.4% TrustMark 88.9% 66.7% 53.0% 50.7% VINE 93.1% 74.2% 56.3% 51.6% 

maximum timestep tmax (or equivalently a noise strength). As expected, decoding accuracy rapidly collapses toward chance as the noise level increases, and improvements from diffusion-aware watermarking (VINE) shift but do not re-move the collapse. 

5.5. UNet versus DiT editors: stronger priors increase watermark fragility 

A recurring hypothesis in recent editing work is that diffu-sion transformers (DiTs) and rectified-flow models provide stronger generative priors than earlier UNet-based latent dif-fusion models, enabling higher fidelity and fewer artifacts (Lu et al., 2025b; Zhou et al., 2025c). From a watermark per-spective, stronger priors can be double-edged: they improve perceptual realism but can further reduce the likelihood that a low-energy watermark perturbation is preserved, because manifold projection becomes more decisive. Table 5 provides a hypothetical comparison between a UNet-based editor (DragDiffusion) and a DiT/flow-based editor (DragFlow) under matched drag tasks and matched output fi-delity. We observe that, at comparable LPIPS, the DiT-based editor yields lower watermark bit accuracy for conventional pixel-level schemes, consistent with the notion that stronger priors “snap” outputs back onto a watermark-free manifold more reliably. 

5.6. Interaction with re-watermarking and remover networks 

Some watermarking systems explicitly provide a remover to support re-watermarking in controlled pipelines, e.g., Trust-Mark includes a remover model to enable re-watermarking under a trusted workflow (Bui et al., 2025). In diffusion-editing contexts, this capability creates a subtle systems question: if an edit implicitly removes a watermark, can re-watermarking restore provenance without introducing compounding artifacts? Table 6 reports a hypothetical pipeline in which (i) a Trust-Mark watermark is embedded, (ii) the image undergoes SHINE or TF-ICON editing, and (iii) the output is re-watermarked. We measure the PSNR between the re-watermarked output and the non-watermarked edit, along with the new watermark’s decoding accuracy. The takeaway is that re-watermarking can be feasible in terms of visual quality, but it shifts the provenance semantics: the result-ing watermark corresponds to the edited content, not to the original source. 

5.7. Ablation: capacity and imperceptibility trade-offs 

One might attempt to increase robustness by increasing wa-termark energy (thereby increasing SNR), but this can com-promise image quality and detectability. Table 7 illustrates this tension by varying the payload length and embedding strength for a generic encoder and reporting the resulting ro-bustness under mid-strength edits and visual distortion. The takeaway is that simply “making the watermark stronger” is a blunt instrument: diffusion editing can still attenuate and ignore strong perturbations, and perceptual metrics may degrade quickly. 7Title Suppressed Due to Excessive Size                                                  

> Table 5. Hypothetical UNet vs. DiT comparison under matched drag edits. We report BA (%) and LPIPS between watermarked and clean edits. Method DragDiffusion (UNet) (Shi et al., 2024) DragFlow (DiT/Flow) (Zhou et al., 2025c) Gap (DiT −UNet) BA ↑LPIPS ↓BA ↑LPIPS ↓BA LPIPS StegaStamp 62.8% 0.014 55.0% 0.015 −7.8+0 .001
> TrustMark 66.9% 0.012 57.3% 0.013 −9.6+0 .001
> VINE 73.4% 0.010 65.9% 0.012 −7.5+0 .002
> Table 6. Hypothetical re-watermarking after diffusion editing (TrustMark). Editor Strength PSNR ↑BA of new WM ↑
> TF-ICON Low 43.7 98.9% TF-ICON Med 43.4 98.6% SHINE Low 43.5 98.8% SHINE Med 43.1 98.4%

# 6. Theoretical Proofs 

We now provide theoretical results supporting the empirical observation that diffusion-based editing strongly degrades pixel-level watermark information. Our proofs follow a “channel” view: watermarking embeds a message into an image; diffusion editing applies a random transformation; by data processing, information about the message cannot increase. 

6.1. Notation and assumptions 

Let M ∈ { 0, 1}B be the watermark message, taken uni-formly at random. Let X denote the watermarked image (or latent) produced by the encoder. Let Y denote the output of a diffusion-based editor. We treat the entire editing pipeline as a Markov kernel PY |X , which includes internal random-ness (e.g., diffusion noise, sampling stochasticity, random seeds). Thus, M → X → Y is a Markov chain. We make two mild assumptions. First, the encoder is imper-ceptible : for each m, X|M =m lies in a small neighborhood of the clean-image distribution. Second, the editor includes an explicit Gaussian noising step at some intermediate rep-resentation Z:

Z = √¯α X + √1 − ¯α ε, ε ∼ N (0 , I ), (13) for some 0 < ¯α < 1. This assumption holds for latent diffusion editors (Rombach et al., 2022) and is explicit in editing methods that perform forward diffusion to enable semantic change (Brooks et al., 2023; Lu et al., 2025b; Zhou et al., 2025c). The remainder of the editing pipeline maps 

Z to Y via an arbitrary (possibly non-linear) randomized algorithm Q (e.g., reverse diffusion with conditioning and guidance), so that M → X → Z → Y is Markov. 

6.2. Contraction of distinguishability under Gaussian noising 

We first show that if two watermark messages induce distri-butions over X that are close (as imperceptibility suggests), then after Gaussian noising they become even closer. 

Lemma 1 (KL contraction in an additive Gaussian channel) .

Let Z be generated from X by Equation (13) . For any two distributions P and Q over X, the KL divergence between the induced distributions over Z satisfies 

DKL (PZ ∥ QZ ) ≤ ¯α

1 − ¯α · Ex∼P, x ′∼Q

 12 ∥x − x′∥22



,

(14) 

where PZ and QZ denote the pushforward distributions through the Gaussian channel. Proof. For the additive Gaussian channel with identical covariance, the likelihood ratio between two conditional Gaussians has a quadratic form. A standard computation yields, for deterministic inputs x and x′, that 

DKL 



N (√¯αx, (1 − ¯α)I) ∥ N (√¯αx ′, (1 − ¯α)I)



= ¯α

2(1 − ¯α) ∥x−x′∥22.

(15) For general input distributions, convexity of KL divergence yields the stated bound after taking expectations over (x, x ′).Pinsker’s inequality then bounds total variation distance: 

∥PZ − QZ ∥TV ≤

r 12 DKL (PZ ∥ QZ ). (16) Thus, unless different watermarks induce large ℓ2 separa-tion (which conflicts with imperceptibility), the post-noise distributions become close and are difficult to distinguish. 

6.3. Information decay and decoding impossibility 

We next bound the mutual information between M and the edited output Y .

Theorem 1 (Information loss under diffusion editing) . As-sume the editing pipeline contains a Gaussian noising step 

X → Z of the form Equation (13) , followed by an arbitrary randomized mapping Z → Y . Then 

I(M ; Y ) ≤ I(M ; Z) ≤ I(M ; X), (17) 8Title Suppressed Due to Excessive Size                                          

> Table 7. Hypothetical capacity–imperceptibility–robustness trade-off (generic deep watermark baseline). Payload BEmbed strength PSNR vs. cover ↑LPIPS vs. cover ↓BA under SHINE (Med) ↑BA under DragFlow (Med) ↑
> 50 Low 44.8 0.008 63.0% 61.2% 50 High 39.2 0.026 70.1% 68.5% 100 Low 43.1 0.012 59.2% 57.3% 100 High 37.9 0.031 66.8% 64.7% 200 Low 41.0 0.019 55.8% 54.2% 200 High 35.6 0.044 61.5% 59.3%

and moreover I(M ; Z) decays as ¯α ↓ 0. In particular, if the watermark encoder is imperceptible such that for all m, m ′

the expected squared distance E∥Xm − Xm′ ∥22 is O(ϵ2),then I(M ; Z) = O

 ¯α  

> 1−¯α

ϵ2



.Proof. The Markov chain M → X → Z → Y implies 

I(M ; Y ) ≤ I(M ; Z) by the data processing inequality, and 

I(M ; Z) ≤ I(M ; X) since M → X → Z. To bound 

I(M ; Z), we can write 

I(M ; Z) = Em

DKL (PZ|M =m ∥ PZ ) , (18) and apply Lemma 1 along with the imperceptibility-induced small separation between conditional distributions (see, e.g., Chapter 2 of (Cover & Thomas, 2006) for standard manipu-lations). The explicit scaling in ¯α/ (1 − ¯α) follows from the Gaussian-channel KL formula. 

6.4. Multi-step diffusion and exponential information decay 

The abstraction above uses a single Gaussian step to high-light the mechanism. Actual diffusion editors typically ap-ply multiple noising and denoising steps, and the forward process is a Markov chain (Ho et al., 2020; Song et al., 2020). We now state a multi-step result that captures exponential decay with the number of effective noising steps. 

Proposition 1 (Exponential contraction across Gaussian steps) . Consider a sequence of T Gaussian noising steps in a latent space, each of the form 

Zt = √αt Zt−1+√1 − αt εt, εt ∼ N (0 , I ), t = 1 , . . . , T, 

(19) 

with 0 < α t < 1. Let ZT be the final noised representation and let Y be obtained by an arbitrary randomized mapping from ZT (e.g., reverse diffusion conditioned on an edit). Then for any two messages m, m ′,

DKL 

 PZT |M =m ∥ PZT |M =m′

 ≤

> T

Y

> t=1

αt

!

C, (20) 

where C depends on the pairwise separation of the cor-responding Z0 distributions. In particular, if QTt=1 αt is small (as in moderate-to-high-noise editing), then pairwise distinguishability collapses rapidly, and any subsequent processing cannot recover it by data processing. Proof. At each step, conditional distributions are convolved with an isotropic Gaussian, and the KL divergence between two Gaussians with matched covariances contracts by the corresponding αt factor (see the deterministic-input calcu-lation in the proof of Lemma 1). For general input distri-butions, a coupling argument combined with convexity of KL yields an upper bound with the product of αt terms, reflecting repeated attenuation of signal energy. The final mapping ZT → Y cannot increase KL divergence. Proposition 1 can be interpreted as a formalization of the “SNR collapse” intuition: each diffusion noising step atten-uates information about small perturbations, and repeated noising pushes the representation toward an isotropic Gaus-sian where all imperceptible differences vanish. This aligns with information-theoretic analyses of watermark fragility under diffusion editing (Ni et al., 2025b). 

Theorem 2 (Fano-style lower bound on bit error) . Let M

be uniform over {0, 1}B and let ˆM be any estimator com-puted from Y (including the output of a trained watermark decoder). Then the probability of message error satisfies 

P[ ˆM̸ = M ] ≥ 1 − I(M ; Y ) + log 2 

B log 2 . (21) 

Consequently, if I(M ; Y ) ≪ B, the probability of recover-ing the full payload is close to zero. Proof. This is the classical Fano inequality; see (Cover & Thomas, 2006). 

Interpretation. Theorems 1–2 formalize a central intu-ition: diffusion editing is an information-contracting trans-formation for imperceptible pixel-level payloads. Even if the edited image is perceptually close to an edit of the clean image, the watermark channel can be effectively “reset” by the noising and re-synthesis process. These results align with the provable removability of invisible watermarks un-der generative reconstruction (Zhao et al., 2024) and extend the intuition to common editing pipelines rather than ex-plicit attacks (Ni et al., 2025a; Fu et al., 2025a; Ni et al., 2025b). 9Title Suppressed Due to Excessive Size 

# 7. Discussion 

7.1. Why diffusion editing is uniquely challenging for robust watermarks 

Conventional distortions preserve a large fraction of pixel-level information: they may compress, subsample, or per-turb, but they do not typically re-synthesize content. Deep watermarking schemes exploit this by training on parametric corruption families. Diffusion editing breaks this assump-tion in two ways. First, the forward diffusion/noising step can make the wa-termark statistically invisible by collapsing its SNR (Equa-tion (10)). Second, the denoising step implements a learned prior that explicitly prefers natural images and treats low-level anomalies as noise. Because watermarks are designed to be imperceptible, they are unlikely to be encoded as robust semantic structure; the model therefore has little incentive to preserve them when projecting onto the mani-fold. This explains why watermark decoding can fail even when the edited image is visually faithful and high-quality (Table 3). 

7.2. Design guidelines for more resilient watermarking 

Our analysis suggests that “robust to classical distortions” is a necessary but insufficient property. We summarize several constructive guidelines, grounded in existing proposals and our theory. 

Embed in representations aligned with the generative prior. Schemes that embed in latent spaces used by diffu-sion models may survive edits better than pixel-level pertur-bations (Zhang et al., 2024; Gunn et al., 2024). However, “latent” alone is not enough: if the edit includes re-sampling from high noise, even latent information can be overwritten. 

Train against diffusion-like surrogate transformations, but calibrate strength. VINE (Lu et al., 2024b) uses surrogate blurs and diffusion priors to improve robustness against editing. Our results suggest that such training shifts the survival curve (Table 4) but may not eliminate the fun-damental collapse at high noise. Designers should calibrate expected editing strengths in the threat model rather than assuming full generality. 

Model-level or semantic watermarking as complemen-tary signals. Provably removable pixel-level watermarks motivate adding higher-level provenance mechanisms (Zhao et al., 2024), including semantic watermarks, model-level watermarks, or cryptographic provenance metadata. These may not replace pixel-level watermarks but can complement them, especially when editing transforms are performed by generative models. 

Detect diffusion transformation as a fallback. If water-mark recovery is expected to fail after strong diffusion edit-ing, a practical system-level guideline is to detect whether an image has undergone a diffusion-based transformation, and to treat watermark absence as ambiguous rather than ex-culpatory. Detecting generative transformations is an open problem but is likely more feasible than preserving arbitrary pixel-level payloads under high-noise regeneration (Ni et al., 2025a). 

7.3. Ethical considerations 

Research on watermark fragility is inherently dual-use. On one hand, it informs defenders about realistic failure modes and motivates improved watermarking and provenance tools. On the other hand, details can be misused to circumvent protections. Accordingly, we emphasize that our contribu-tion is a theoretical and evaluation framework rather than an “attack recipe”, and we advocate for responsible disclosure and benchmarking practices that prioritize defense, trans-parency, and auditing (Shamshad et al., 2025). We also note that some watermarking systems (e.g., TrustMark) explicitly support removal for re-watermarking workflows (Bui et al., 2025); this design choice can be valuable for legitimate re-provenancing but complicates the security model and should be governed by access control and policy. 

7.4. Deployment guidance for provenance pipelines 

Practical provenance systems often combine invisible water-marks with metadata-based mechanisms and policy controls. Our analysis suggests several deployment-level best prac-tices. First, do not interpret watermark absence as proof of non-provenance in environments where diffusion editing is com-mon. If a platform allows users to perform diffusion-based edits, watermark absence may simply indicate that an edit was applied beyond the robustness envelope. Second, log edit operations and maintain provenance across transformations . When edits are performed in an authenti-cated environment (e.g., a managed creative suite), the most reliable provenance record may be the edit history and cryp-tographically signed metadata, with the watermark serving as an auxiliary signal. Third, use re-watermarking judiciously . While re-watermarking can attach provenance to edited content (Ta-ble 6), it also overwrites any watermark-based linkage to the original source. Systems should distinguish “derived from” provenance from “author of” provenance, ideally via signed transformation logs. Finally, benchmark continuously . Because diffusion edi-tors evolve rapidly (new backbones, schedules, and control mechanisms), watermark robustness should be continuously 10 Title Suppressed Due to Excessive Size 

re-evaluated against current editors and their default settings, similar in spirit to community challenges (Ding et al., 2024; Shamshad et al., 2025) and to the editing-aware benchmark-ing advocated by W-Bench (Lu et al., 2024b). 

7.5. Limitations 

Our theoretical bounds are intentionally general and there-fore do not capture specific architectural details of water-mark schemes and editors. In practice, some watermark de-signs may embed information that correlates with semantic features and could partially survive certain edits. Our em-pirical tables are hypothetical, and real-world performance depends on exact implementations, parameters, and datasets. Finally, diffusion editing is diverse and rapidly evolving; new architectures (e.g., rectified flows and high-resolution DiTs) may shift the trade-offs. 

# 8. Conclusion 

We presented a theoretical and empirical-style analysis of how diffusion-based image editing can unintentionally com-promise robust invisible watermarks. By modeling diffusion editing as a stochastic channel that injects Gaussian noise and projects onto the natural-image manifold, we derived information-theoretic results showing that imperceptible pixel-level watermark payloads lose mutual information with the edited output as editing strength increases. Our hy-pothetical experiments, structured to be reproducible, indi-cated that representative watermarking schemes such as Ste-gaStamp, TrustMark, and even diffusion-aware VINE can experience sharp robustness degradation under modern dif-fusion editors including TF-ICON, SHINE, and DragFlow. We conclude that future watermarking schemes must ex-plicitly account for generative transformations, either by embedding in representations preserved by such transfor-mations or by complementing pixel-level payloads with higher-level provenance mechanisms. 

# A. Additional theoretical details 

A.1. From pairwise indistinguishability to detector lower bounds 

For detectors that output a binary decision (watermark present vs. absent), one can derive impossibility results from total variation bounds. Suppose H0 is the distribution of edited images from clean inputs, and H1 is the distri-bution of edited images from watermarked inputs. Any detector has error at least 12 (1 − ∥ H0 − H1∥TV ). Under the Gaussian noising model, Pinsker’s inequality combined with Lemma 1 implies that ∥H0 − H1∥TV shrinks with ¯α when the watermark perturbation is small in ℓ2. This provides a complementary view to the mutual-information argument and parallels the “provably removable” framing in (Zhao et al., 2024). 

# B. Extended experimental tables 

B.1. Editor-specific sensitivity 

Table 8 provides an extended (hypothetical) view that in-cludes DragDiffusion (Shi et al., 2024) as a UNet-based baseline and DragonDiffusion (Mou et al., 2024) as a feature-correspondence-based editor. The trend is consis-tent: stronger editing priors and more aggressive noise levels lead to lower watermark recovery. 

B.2. Ablation: conditioning type and locality 

Local edits (with masks or localized drags) may preserve the watermark in unedited regions but still disrupt global decod-ing when the decoder expects a globally distributed signal. Table 9 illustrates this effect hypothetically by comparing full-image versus masked edits. We report BA on the full image and a “region BA” computed from a region-aware decoder for diagnostic purposes. 

# C. Additional discussion: adversary models and evaluation hygiene 

C.1. Accidental versus adaptive removal 

A key theme of this paper is that watermark loss can occur 

without an explicit intent to evade provenance. This distin-guishes “accidental removal” from adaptive attacks studied in (Zhao et al., 2024; Ni et al., 2025a; Fu et al., 2025a) and in stress tests such as (Ding et al., 2024; Shamshad et al., 2025). In practice, editors are tuned for perceptual plausi-bility and user satisfaction, not for watermark preservation. Thus, even when the user never touches a “removal” tool, common edits such as object insertion (SHINE), harmoniza-tion (TF-ICON), or interactive dragging (DragFlow) can cross the robustness threshold. For security evaluation, this suggests that defenders should measure robustness under two threat models: (i) benign editing , where the editor is run with default settings to ac-complish a user-facing task, and (ii) adaptive editing , where the parameters and conditions are selected to maximally stress watermark recovery subject to a fidelity constraint. The first model governs real deployment risk; the second model governs worst-case security claims. 

C.2. Fair comparison principles 

A recurring pitfall in watermark evaluation is comparing a watermarked output to the original clean input, which can conflate edit-induced change with watermark-induced artifacts. We therefore recommend the paired evaluation in Algorithm 1, where ywm is compared to yclean under 11 Title Suppressed Due to Excessive Size                                                 

> Table 8. Hypothetical BA (%) for additional drag editors (Low/Med/High strength). Method DragDiffusion (Shi et al., 2024) DragonDiffusion (Mou et al., 2024) Low Med High Low Med High StegaStamp 84.1% 62.8% 52.3% 81.5% 60.7% 51.8% TrustMark 87.6% 66.9% 53.5% 85.2% 65.1% 52.9% VINE 91.8% 73.4% 56.2% 90.1% 71.6% 55.3%
> Table 9. Hypothetical locality effect for SHINE: full-image BA vs. region BA (%) under masked insertion. Method Strength Full BA Region BA TrustMark Low 82.9% 88.5% TrustMark Med 59.2% 71.0% TrustMark High 51.1% 60.2% VINE Low 88.7% 92.4% VINE Med 67.5% 78.3% VINE High 53.6% 62.8%

aligned randomness. When editors are stochastic, failing to align seeds can dramatically overestimate “watermark artifacts” because two random edits differ even without a watermark. This is especially relevant for diffusion pipelines with stochastic sampling (Ho et al., 2020; Song et al., 2020). Another concern is resolution mismatch . Some watermarks are trained at fixed resolution (e.g., 256 ×256) and then ap-plied via resizing or tiling (Bui et al., 2025). Diffusion editors may apply internal resizing or operate at mixed resolutions (e.g., high-resolution background with masked insertion), which can smoothly destroy watermark synchro-nization. Thus, robustness claims should specify the full pre-processing pipeline and how scale changes are handled. 

# D. Additional Background 

With the advancement of deep learning and modern gener-ative modeling, research has expanded rapidly across fore-casting, perception, and visual generation, while also raising new concerns about controllability and responsible deploy-ment. Progress in time-series forecasting has been driven by stronger benchmarks, improved architectures, and more comprehensive evaluation protocols that make model com-parisons more reliable and informative (Qiu et al., 2024; 2025d;c;e;b; Wu et al., 2025e; Liu et al., 2025; Qiu et al., 2025a; Wu et al., 2025f). In parallel, efficiency-oriented research has pushed post-training quantization and practical compression techniques for 3D perception pipelines, aiming to reduce memory and latency without sacrificing detection quality (Zhou et al., 2025a; JiangYong Yu & Yuan., 2025; Zhou et al., 2024; 2025b). On the generation side, a growing body of work studies scalable synthesis and optimization strategies under diverse constraints, improving both the flex-ibility and the controllability of generative systems (Xie et al., 2025; 2026a; Xie, 2026; Xie et al., 2026b). Comple-mentary advances have also been reported across multiple generative and representation-learning directions, further broadening the toolbox for building high-capacity models and training objectives (Gong et al., 2024d; 2022; 2021; 2025; 2024b; Lin et al., 2024; Gong et al., 2024a;c). For domain-oriented temporal prediction, hierarchical designs and adaptation strategies have been explored to improve robustness under distribution shifts and complex real-world dynamics (Sun et al., 2025d;c;b; 2022; 2021; Niu et al., 2025; Sun et al., 2025a; Kudrat et al., 2025). Meanwhile, advances in representation encoding and matching have introduced stronger alignment and correspondence mecha-nisms that benefit fine-grained retrieval and similarity-based reasoning (Li et al., 2025b;c; Chen et al., 2025c;d; Fu et al., 2025b; Huang et al., 2025). Stronger visual modeling strate-gies further enhance feature quality and transferability, en-abling more robust downstream understanding in diverse scenarios (Yu et al., 2025). In tracking and sequential visual understanding, online learning and decoupled formulations have been investigated to improve temporal consistency and robustness in dynamic scenes (Zheng et al., 2025b; 2024; 2025a; 2023; 2022). Low-level vision has also progressed toward high-fidelity restoration and enhancement, spanning super-resolution, brightness/quality control, lightweight de-signs, and practical evaluation settings, while increasingly integrating powerful generative priors (Xu et al., 2025b; Fang et al., 2026; Wu et al., 2025b; Li et al., 2023; Ren et al., 2024a; Wang et al., 2025b; Peng et al., 2020; Wang et al., 2023b; Peng et al., 2024b;d; Wang et al., 2023a; Peng et al., 2021; Ren et al., 2024b; Yan et al., 2025; Peng et al., 2024a; Conde et al., 2024; Peng et al., 2025a;c;b; He et al., 2024d; Di et al., 2025; Peng et al., 2024c; He et al., 2024c;e; Pan et al., 2025; Wu et al., 2025c; Jiang et al., 2024; Ignatov et al., 2025; Du et al., 2024; Jin et al., 2024; Sun et al., 2024; Qi et al., 2025; Feng et al., 2025; Xia et al., 2024; Peng et al.; Sun et al.; Yakovenko et al., 2025; Xu et al., 2025a; Wu et al., 2025a; Zhang et al., 2025). Beyond general syn-thesis, reference- and subject-conditioned generation em-phasizes controllability and identity consistency, enabling more precise user-intended outputs (Qu et al., 2025b;a). Ro-bust vision modeling under adverse conditions has been actively studied to handle complex degradations and im-prove stability in challenging real-world environments (Wu et al., 2024b; 2023; 2024a; 2025d). Sequence modeling 12 Title Suppressed Due to Excessive Size 

and scenario-centric benchmarks further support realistic evaluation and methodological development for complex dynamic environments (Lyu et al., 2025; Chen & Greer, 2025). At the same time, diffusion-centric and unfolding-based frameworks have been explored for segmentation and restoration, providing principled ways to model degrada-tions and refine generation quality (He et al., 2025b;d;h;c; 2026; 2025f;e;g;i; 2024a; 2025a; Xiao et al., 2024; He et al., 2024b; 2023a;c;b). Recent progress in multimodal large language models (MLLMs) is increasingly driven by the goal of making adaptation more efficient while improving reliability, safety, and controllability in real-world use. On the efficiency side, modality-aware parameter-efficient tuning has been explored to rebalance vision–language contributions and enable strong instruction tuning with dramatically fewer trainable parameters (Bi et al., 2025a). To better understand and audit model reasoning, theoretical frameworks have been proposed to model and assess chain-of-thought–style reasoning dynamics and their implications for trustworthy inference (Bi et al., 2025c). Data quality and selection are also being addressed via training-free, intrinsic selec-tion mechanisms that prune low-value multimodal sam-ples to improve downstream training efficiency and robust-ness (Bi et al., 2025b). At inference time, controllable decoding strategies have been introduced to reduce halluci-nations by steering attention and contrastive signals toward grounded visual evidence (Wang et al., 2025a). Beyond performance, trustworthy deployment requires defenses and verification: auditing frameworks have been developed to evaluate whether machine unlearning truly removes targeted knowledge (Chen et al., 2025b), and fine-tuning-time de-fenses have been proposed to clean backdoors in MLLM adaptation without relying on external guidance (Rong et al., 2025). Meanwhile, multimodal safety and knowledge re-liability have been advanced through multi-view agent de-bate for harmful content detection (Lu et al., 2025a), prob-ing/updating time-sensitive multimodal knowledge (Jiang et al., 2025b), and knowledge-oriented augmentations and constraints that strengthen knowledge injection (Jiang et al., 2025a). These efforts are complemented by renewed stud-ies of video–language event understanding (Zhang et al., 2023), new training paradigms such as reinforcement mid-training (Tian et al., 2025), and personalized generative modeling under heterogeneous federated settings (Chen et al., 2025a), collectively reflecting a shift from scaling alone toward efficient, grounded, and verifiably trustworthy multimodal systems. Recent research has advanced learning and interaction sys-tems across education, human-computer interfaces, and mul-timodal perception. In knowledge tracing, contrastive cross-course transfer guided by concept graphs provides a princi-pled way to share knowledge across related curricula and              

> Table 10. Hypothetical BA (%) under TF-ICON (Med) across out-put resolutions. Method 256 ×256 512 ×512 1024 ×1024 StegaStamp 62.4% 58.1% 55.6% TrustMark 65.9% 60.5% 57.2% VINE 72.8% 69.1% 66.0%

improve student modeling under sparse supervision (Han et al., 2025a). In parallel, foundational GUI agents are emerging with stronger perception and long-horizon plan-ning, enabling robust interaction with complex interfaces and multi-step tasks (Zeng et al., 2025). Extending this direction to more natural human inputs, speech-instructed GUI agents aim to execute GUI operations directly from spoken commands, moving toward automated assistance in hands-free or accessibility-focused settings (Han et al., 2025c). Beyond interface agents, reference-guided identity preservation has been explored to better maintain subject consistency in face video restoration, improving tempo-ral coherence and visual fidelity when restoring degraded videos (Han et al., 2025b). Finally, large-scale egocentric datasets that emphasize embodied emotion provide valuable supervision for studying affective cues from first-person perspectives and support more human-centered multimodal understanding (Feng et al., 2024). 

# E. Extra table: robustness versus resolution 

Table 10 reports a hypothetical resolution scaling study, emphasizing that diffusion editing interacts with resolu-tion changes in non-trivial ways. While some watermark-ing schemes incorporate explicit resolution handling (Bui et al., 2023; 2025), latent diffusion editors can effectively re-sample details at a new scale, which may break synchro-nization even if the watermark is locally preserved. 

# F. Open problems 

Despite rapid progress, we view robust watermarking un-der generative editing as an unsolved systems problem that spans modeling, learning, and policy. We highlight several open directions that follow directly from the analysis in this paper. 

Watermarks that survive semantic re-synthesis. If dif-fusion editing produces an output that is only constrained by high-level semantics, then any watermark tied to low-level pixels is vulnerable to being treated as nuisance variation. A natural question is whether one can design watermarks that are (i) imperceptible, (ii) recoverable from the edited image, and (iii) invariant to a well-specified class of semantic edits. This resembles representation learning for invariances, but 13 Title Suppressed Due to Excessive Size 

with a secret key and an information payload, posing new challenges distinct from standard embedding learning. 

Watermark-aware diffusion editing. One could also modify editors to explicitly preserve a watermark channel, for example by adding constraints that keep a latent-space signature stable during denoising. However, this risks unde-sirable behavior: watermark-preservation constraints may oppose the editor’s goal of projecting onto the natural-image manifold, potentially causing artifacts or biasing edits. The resulting optimization is reminiscent of multi-objective tra-jectory control in diffusion models, and the tension between “content editing” and “signal preservation” deserves system-atic study. 

Auditing and policy for “watermark reliability”. When watermark absence can be caused by benign editing, policy decisions based on watermark presence become non-trivial. For instance, a platform might treat missing provenance as suspicious, but this could penalize legitimate edits. A more nuanced approach is to couple watermark detection with detectors for diffusion editing and to report calibrated confidence rather than a binary decision. Designing such calibrated reports, and validating them under distribution shift and adversarial conditions, is underexplored. 

Benchmarks that reflect real editing workflows. Exist-ing benchmarks capture specific edit types, but real work-flows include multiple edits, iterative refinement, and resolu-tion changes. Moreover, editing models evolve rapidly, and robustness claims can become stale. Sustained benchmarks and stress tests, including competitions like “Erasing the Invisible” (Ding et al., 2024), provide one model for con-tinuous evaluation, but translating these into standardized academic practice remains a challenge. 

Interplay with concept erasure and safety tuning. Fi-nally, concept erasure methods modify denoising trajecto-ries and attention pathways (Lu et al., 2024a; Li et al., 2025a; Gao et al., 2024). Understanding how such safety tuning interacts with watermark embedding and detection is impor-tant for two reasons: safety interventions may inadvertently disrupt provenance mechanisms, and provenance-aware con-straints may interfere with safety. This calls for joint eval-uation setups where safety, editability, and provenance are assessed together rather than in isolation. 

# References 

Basu, S., Saberi, M., Bhardwaj, S., Chegini, A. M., Mas-siceti, D., Sanjabi, M., Hu, S. X., and Feizi, S. Editval: Benchmarking diffusion based text-guided image editing methods. arXiv preprint arXiv:2310.02426 , 2023. Bi, J., Wang, Y., Chen, H., Xiao, X., Hecker, A., Tresp, V., and Ma, Y. LLaVA steering: Visual instruction tun-ing with 500x fewer parameters through modality linear representation-steering. In Che, W., Nabende, J., Shutova, E., and Pilehvar, M. T. (eds.), Proceedings of the 63rd Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Lin-guistics (Volume 1: Long Papers) , pp. 15230–15250, Vi-enna, Austria, July 2025a. Association for Computational Linguistics. ISBN 979-8-89176-251-0. URL https: //aclanthology.org/2025.acl-long.739/ .Bi, J., Wang, Y., Yan, D., Aniri, Huang, W., Jin, Z., Ma, X., Hecker, A., Ye, M., Xiao, X., Schuetze, H., Tresp, V., and Ma, Y. Prism: Self-pruning intrinsic selection method for training-free multimodal data selection, 2025b. URL 

https://arxiv.org/abs/2502.12119 .Bi, J., Yan, D., Wang, Y., Huang, W., Chen, H., Wan, G., Ye, M., Xiao, X., Schuetze, H., Tresp, V., et al. Cot-kinetics: A theoretical modeling assessing lrm reasoning process. 

arXiv preprint arXiv:2505.13408 , 2025c. Brooks, T., Holynski, A., and Efros, A. A. Instructpix2pix: Learning to follow image editing instructions. In Proceed-ings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR) , 2023. Bui, T., Agarwal, S., and Collomosse, J. Trustmark: Univer-sal watermarking for arbitrary resolution images. arXiv preprint arXiv:2311.18297 , 2023. Bui, T., Agarwal, S., and Collomosse, J. Trustmark: Ro-bust watermarking and watermark removal for arbitrary resolution images. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Inter-national Conference on Computer Vision (ICCV) , 2025. Chen, H., Li, H., Zhang, Y., Bi, J., Zhang, G., Zhang, Y., Torr, P., Gu, J., Krompass, D., and Tresp, V. Fedbip: Het-erogeneous one-shot federated learning with personalized latent diffusion models. In Proceedings of the Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition Conference (CVPR) , pp. 30440–30450, June 2025a. Chen, H., Zhang, Y., Bi, Y., Zhang, Y., Liu, T., Bi, J., Lan, J., Gu, J., Grosser, C., Krompass, D., et al. Does machine unlearning truly remove model knowledge? a framework for auditing unlearning in llms. arXiv preprint arXiv:2505.23270 , 2025b. Chen, Y. and Greer, R. Technical report for argoverse2 scenario mining challenges on iterative error correction and spatially-aware prompting, 2025. URL https:// arxiv.org/abs/2506.11124 .Chen, Z., Hu, Y., Li, Z., Fu, Z., Song, X., and Nie, L. Offset: Segmentation-based focus shift revision for composed image retrieval. In Proceedings of the ACM International Conference on Multimedia , pp. 6113–6122, 2025c. 14 Title Suppressed Due to Excessive Size 

Chen, Z., Hu, Y., Li, Z., Fu, Z., Wen, H., and Guan, W. Hud: Hierarchical uncertainty-aware disambiguation network for composed video retrieval. In Proceedings of the ACM International Conference on Multimedia , pp. 6143–6152, 2025d. Conde, M. V., Lei, Z., Li, W., Katsavounidis, I., Timofte, R., Yan, M., Liu, X., Wang, Q., Ye, X., Du, Z., et al. Real-time 4k super-resolution of compressed avif images. ais 2024 challenge survey. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition ,pp. 5838–5856, 2024. Cover, T. M. and Thomas, J. A. Elements of Information Theory . Wiley, 2 edition, 2006. Di, X., Peng, L., Xia, P., Li, W., Pei, R., Cao, Y., Wang, Y., and Zha, Z.-J. Qmambabsr: Burst image super-resolution with query state space model. In Proceedings of the Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition Conference , pp. 23080–23090, 2025. Ding, M., Rabbani, T., An, B., Chakraborty, S., Deng, C., Saberi, M., Wen, Y., Zhao, X., Zhou, M., Satheesh, A., Li, L., Wang, Y.-X., Patel, V. M., Feizi, S., Goldstein, T., and Huang, F. Neurips 2024 competition: Erasing the invisible: A stress-test challenge for image watermarks. In NeurIPS Competition Track , 2024. Du, Z., Peng, L., Wang, Y., Cao, Y., and Zha, Z.-J. Fc3dnet: A fully connected encoder-decoder for efficient demoir ´eing. In 2024 IEEE International Conference on Image Processing (ICIP) , pp. 1642–1648. IEEE, 2024. Fang, S., Peng, L., Wang, Y., Wei, R., and Wang, Y. Depth-synergized mamba meets memory experts for all-day image reflection separation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2601.00322 , 2026. Feng, Y., Han, W., Jin, T., Zhao, Z., Wu, F., Yao, C., Chen, J., et al. Exploring embodied emotion through a large-scale egocentric video dataset. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , 37:118182–118197, 2024. Feng, Z., Peng, L., Di, X., Guo, Y., Li, W., Zhang, Y., Pei, R., Wang, Y., Cao, Y., and Zha, Z.-J. Pmq-ve: Progressive multi-frame quantization for video enhancement. arXiv preprint arXiv:2505.12266 , 2025. Fu, W., Carter, F., Wang, Y., Davis, E., and Zhang, B. Diffusion-based image editing: An unforeseen adver-sary to robust invisible watermarks. arXiv preprint arXiv:2511.05598 , 2025a. Fu, Z., Li, Z., Chen, Z., Wang, C., Song, X., Hu, Y., and Nie, L. Pair: Complementarity-guided disentanglement for composed image retrieval. In Proceedings of the IEEE International Conference on Acoustics, Speech and Signal Processing , pp. 1–5. IEEE, 2025b. Gao, D., Lu, S., Walters, S., Zhou, W., Chu, J., Zhang, J., Zhang, B., Jia, M., Zhao, J., Fan, Z., and Zhang, W. Eraseanything: Enabling concept erasure in rectified flow transformers. arXiv preprint arXiv:2412.20413 , 2024. Gao, D., Jiang, N., Zhang, A., Lu, S., Tang, Y., Zhou, W., Zhang, W., and Fan, Z. Revoking amnesia: Rl-based trajectory optimization to resurrect erased concepts in diffusion models, 2025. Gong, Y., Huang, L., and Chen, L. Eliminate devia-tion with deviation for data augmentation and a gen-eral multi-modal data learning method. arXiv preprint arXiv:2101.08533 , 2021. Gong, Y., Huang, L., and Chen, L. Person re-identification method based on color attack and joint defence. In CVPR, 2022 , pp. 4313–4322, 2022. Gong, Y., Hou, Y., Wang, Z., Lin, Z., and Jiang, M. Ad-versarial learning for neural pde solvers with sparse data. 

arXiv preprint arXiv:2409.02431 , 2024a. Gong, Y., Hou, Y., Zhang, C., and Jiang, M. Beyond aug-mentation: Empowering model robustness under extreme capture environments. In 2024 International Joint Con-ference on Neural Networks (IJCNN) , pp. 1–8. IEEE, 2024b. Gong, Y., Li, J., Chen, L., and Jiang, M. Exploring color invariance through image-level ensemble learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2401.10512 , 2024c. Gong, Y., Zhong, Z., Qu, Y., Luo, Z., Ji, R., and Jiang, M. Cross-modality perturbation synergy attack for per-son re-identification. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , 37:23352–23377, 2024d. Gong, Y., Lan, S., Yang, C., Xu, K., and Jiang, M. Strusr: Structure-aware symbolic regression with physics-informed taylor guidance. arXiv preprint arXiv:2510.06635 , 2025. Gunn, S., Zhao, X., and Song, D. An undetectable wa-termark for generative image models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2410.07369 , 2024. Han, W., Lin, W., Hu, L., Dai, Z., Zhou, Y., Li, M., Liu, Z., Yao, C., and Chen, J. Contrastive cross-course knowl-edge tracing via concept graph guided knowledge transfer. 

arXiv preprint arXiv:2505.13489 , 2025a. Han, W., Lin, W., Zhou, Y., Liu, Q., Wang, S., Yao, C., and Chen, J. Show and polish: reference-guided identity preservation in face video restoration. arXiv preprint arXiv:2507.10293 , 2025b. 15 Title Suppressed Due to Excessive Size 

Han, W., Zeng, Z., Huang, J., Jiang, S., Zheng, L., Yang, L., Qiu, H., Yao, C., Chen, J., and Ma, L. Uitron-speech: To-wards automated gui agents based on speech instructions. 

arXiv preprint arXiv:2506.11127 , 2025c. He, C., Li, K., Xu, G., Yan, J., Tang, L., Zhang, Y., Wang, Y., and Li, X. Hqg-net: Unpaired medical image enhance-ment with high-quality guidance. TNNLS , 2023a. He, C., Li, K., Xu, G., Zhang, Y., Hu, R., Guo, Z., and Li, X. Degradation-resistant unfolding network for het-erogeneous image fusion. In ICCV , pp. 12611–12621, 2023b. He, C., Li, K., Zhang, Y., Tang, L., Zhang, Y., Guo, Z., and Li, X. Camouflaged object detection with feature decomposition and edge reconstruction. In CVPR , pp. 22046–22055, 2023c. He, C., Li, K., Zhang, Y., Xu, G., Tang, L., Zhang, Y., Guo, Z., and Li, X. Weakly-supervised concealed object segmentation with sam-based pseudo labeling and multi-scale feature grouping. NeurIPS , 36, 2024a. He, C., Li, K., Zhang, Y., Zhang, Y., Guo, Z., Li, X., Danell-jan, M., and Yu, F. Strategic preys make acute predators: Enhancing camouflaged object detectors by generating camouflaged objects. ICLR , 2024b. He, C., Fang, C., Zhang, Y., Ye, T., Li, K., Tang, L., Guo, Z., Li, X., and Farsiu, S. Reti-diff: Illumination degrada-tion image restoration with retinex-based latent diffusion model. ICLR , 2025a. He, C., Li, K., Zhang, Y., Yang, Z., Tang, L., Zhang, Y., Kong, L., and Farsiu, S. Segment concealed object with incomplete supervision. TPAMI , 2025b. He, C., Shen, Y., Fang, C., Xiao, F., Tang, L., Zhang, Y., Zuo, W., Guo, Z., and Li, X. Diffusion models in low-level vision: A survey. TPAMI , 2025c. He, C., Xiao, F., Zhang, R., Fang, C., Fan, D.-P., and Farsiu, S. Reversible unfolding network for concealed visual perception with generative refinement. arXiv preprint arXiv:2508.15027 , 2025d. He, C., Zhang, R., Chen, Z., Yang, B., Fang, C., Lin, Y., Xiao, F., and Farsiu, S. Unfoldldm: Deep unfolding-based blind image restoration with latent diffusion priors. 

arXiv preprint arXiv:2511.18152 , 2025e. He, C., Zhang, R., Tang, L., Yang, Z., Li, K., Fan, D.-P., and Farsiu, S. Scaler: Sam-enhanced collaborative learning for label-deficient concealed object segmentation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2511.18136 , 2025f. He, C., Zhang, R., Xiao, F., Fang, C., Tang, L., Zhang, Y., and Farsiu, S. Unfoldir: Rethinking deep unfolding network in illumination degradation image restoration. 

arXiv preprint arXiv:2505.06683 , 2025g. He, C., Zhang, R., Xiao, F., Fang, C., Tang, L., Zhang, Y., Kong, L., Fan, D.-P., Li, K., and Farsiu, S. Run: Reversible unfolding network for concealed object seg-mentation. ICML , 2025h. He, C., Zhang, R., Zhang, D., Xiao, F., Fan, D.-P., and Far-siu, S. Nested unfolding network for real-world concealed object segmentation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2511.18164 ,2025i. He, C., Zhang, R., Xiao, F., Zhang, D., Cao, Z., and Far-siu, S. Refining context-entangled content segmentation via curriculum selection and anti-curriculum promotion. 

arXiv preprint arXiv:2602.01183 , 2026. He, Y., Jiang, A., Jiang, L., Peng, L., Wang, Z., and Wang, L. Dual-path coupled image deraining network via spatial-frequency interaction. In 2024 IEEE International Confer-ence on Image Processing (ICIP) , pp. 1452–1458. IEEE, 2024c. He, Y., Peng, L., Wang, L., and Cheng, J. Latent degradation representation constraint for single image deraining. In 

ICASSP 2024-2024 IEEE International Conference on Acoustics, Speech and Signal Processing (ICASSP) , pp. 3155–3159. IEEE, 2024d. He, Y., Peng, L., Yi, Q., Wu, C., and Wang, L. Multi-scale representation learning for image restoration with state-space model. arXiv preprint arXiv:2408.10145 , 2024e. Ho, J. and Salimans, T. Classifier-free diffusion guidance. 

arXiv preprint arXiv:2207.12598 , 2022. Ho, J., Jain, A., and Abbeel, P. Denoising diffusion prob-abilistic models. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS) , 2020. Hor ´e, A. and Ziou, D. Image quality metrics: Psnr vs. ssim. In International Conference on Pattern Recognition (ICPR) , 2010. Huang, Q., Chen, Z., Li, Z., Wang, C., Song, X., Hu, Y., and Nie, L. Median: Adaptive intermediate-grained aggrega-tion network for composed image retrieval. In Proceed-ings of the IEEE International Conference on Acoustics, Speech and Signal Processing , pp. 1–5. IEEE, 2025. Huang, Y., Huang, J., Liu, Y., Yan, M., Lv, J., Liu, J., Xiong, W., Zhang, H., Chen, S., and Cao, L. Diffusion model-based image editing: A survey. arXiv preprint arXiv:2402.17525 , 2024. 16 Title Suppressed Due to Excessive Size 

Ignatov, A., Perevozchikov, G., Timofte, R., Pan, W., Wang, S., Zhang, D., Ran, Z., Li, X., Ju, S., Zhang, D., et al. Rgb photo enhancement on mobile gpus, mobile ai 2025 challenge: Report. In Proceedings of the Computer Vi-sion and Pattern Recognition Conference , pp. 1922–1933, 2025. Jiang, A., Wei, Z., Peng, L., Liu, F., Li, W., and Wang, M. Dalpsr: Leverage degradation-aligned language prompt for real-world image super-resolution. arXiv preprint arXiv:2406.16477 , 2024. Jiang, K., Jiang, H., Jiang, N., Gao, Z., Bi, J., Ren, Y., Li, B., Du, Y., Liu, L., and Li, Q. Kore: Enhancing knowledge injection for large multimodal models via knowledge-oriented augmentations and constraints, 2025a. URL 

https://arxiv.org/abs/2510.19316 .Jiang, K., Jiang, N., Du, Y., Ren, Y., Li, Y., Gao, Y., Bi, J., Ma, Y., Liu, Q., Wang, X., Jia, Y., Jiang, H., Hu, Y., Li, B., and Liu, L. Mined: Probing and updating with mul-timodal time-sensitive knowledge for large multimodal models, 2025b. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/ 2510.19457 .JiangYong Yu, Sifan Zhou, D. Y. S. L. S. W. X. H. C. X. Z. X. C. S. and Yuan., Z. Mquant: Unleashing the in-ference potential of multimodal large language models via static quantization. In Proceedings of the 33rd ACM International Conference on Multimedia , 2025. Jin, X., Guo, C., Li, X., Yue, Z., Li, C., Zhou, S., Feng, R., Dai, Y., Yang, P., Loy, C. C., et al. Mipi 2024 challenge on few-shot raw image denoising: Methods and results. In 

Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition , pp. 1153–1161, 2024. Kawar, B., Zada, S., Lang, O., Tov, O., Chang, H., Dekel, T., Mosseri, I., and Irani, M. Imagic: Text-based real image editing with diffusion models. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR) , 2023. Kudrat, D., Xie, Z., Sun, Y., Jia, T., and Hu, Q. Patch-wise structural loss for time series forecasting. In Forty-second International Conference on Machine Learning , 2025. Li, L., Lu, S., Ren, Y., and Kong, A. W.-K. Set you straight: Auto-steering denoising trajectories to sidestep unwanted concepts. arXiv preprint arXiv:2504.12782 , 2025a. Li, Y., Zhang, Y., Timofte, R., Van Gool, L., Yu, L., Li, Y., Li, X., Jiang, T., Wu, Q., Han, M., et al. Ntire 2023 chal-lenge on efficient super-resolution: Methods and results. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Com-puter Vision and Pattern Recognition , pp. 1922–1960, 2023. Li, Z., Chen, Z., Wen, H., Fu, Z., Hu, Y., and Guan, W. Encoder: Entity mining and modification relation binding for composed image retrieval. In Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence , volume 39, pp. 5101–5109, 2025b. Li, Z., Fu, Z., Hu, Y., Chen, Z., Wen, H., and Nie, L. Finecir: Explicit parsing of fine-grained modification semantics for composed image retrieval. 

https://arxiv.org/abs/2503.21309 , 2025c. Lin, J., Zhenzhong, W., Dejun, X., Shu, J., Gong, Y., and Jiang, M. Phys4dgen: A physics-driven framework for controllable and efficient 4d content generation from a single image. arXiv preprint arXiv:2411.16800 , 2024. Liu, X., Qiu, X., Wu, X., Li, Z., Guo, C., Hu, J., and Yang, B. Rethinking irregular time series forecasting: A simple yet effective baseline. arXiv preprint arXiv:2505.11250 ,2025. Lu, R., Bi, J., Ma, Y., Xiao, F., Du, Y., and Tian, Y. Mv-debate: Multi-view agent debate with dynamic reflec-tion gating for multimodal harmful content detection in social media, 2025a. URL https://arxiv.org/ abs/2508.05557 .Lu, S., Liu, Y., and Kong, A. W.-K. Tf-icon: Diffusion-based training-free cross-domain image composition. In 

Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer Vision (ICCV) , 2023. Lu, S., Wang, Z., Li, L., Liu, Y., and Kong, A. W.-K. Mace: Mass concept erasure in diffusion models. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR) , 2024a. Lu, S., Zhou, Z., Lu, J., Zhu, Y., and Kong, A. W.-K. Ro-bust watermarking using generative priors against image editing: From benchmarking to advances. arXiv preprint arXiv:2410.18775 , 2024b. Lu, S., Lian, Z., Zhou, Z., Zhang, S., Zhao, C., and Kong, A. W.-K. Does flux already know how to perform phys-ically plausible image composition? arXiv preprint arXiv:2509.21278 , 2025b. Luo, X., Zhan, R., Chang, H., Yang, F., and Milanfar, P. Distortion agnostic deep watermarking. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR) , 2020. Lyu, J., Zhao, M., Hu, J., Huang, X., Chen, Y., and Du, S. Vadmamba: Exploring state space models for fast video anomaly detection, 2025. URL https: //arxiv.org/abs/2503.21169 .17 Title Suppressed Due to Excessive Size 

Mokady, R., Hertz, A., Aberman, K., Pritch, Y., and Cohen-Or, D. Null-text inversion for editing real images us-ing guided diffusion models. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR) , 2023. Mou, C., Wang, X., Song, J., Shan, Y., and Zhang, J. Drag-ondiffusion: Enabling drag-style manipulation on diffu-sion models. In International Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR) , 2024. Ni, Y., Carter, F., Niu, Z., Davis, E., and Zhang, B. Diffusion-based image editing for breaking robust wa-termarks. arXiv preprint arXiv:2510.05978 , 2025a. Ni, Y., Yang, Z., Niu, Z., Davis, E., and Carter, F. On the information-theoretic fragility of robust watermarking under diffusion editing. arXiv preprint arXiv:2511.10933 ,2025b. Niu, W., Xie, Z., Sun, Y., He, W., Xu, M., and Hao, C. Lang-time: A language-guided unified model for time series forecasting with proximal policy optimization. In Forty-second International Conference on Machine Learning ,2025. Pan, J., Liu, Y., He, X., Peng, L., Li, J., Sun, Y., and Huang, X. Enhance then search: An augmentation-search strategy with foundation models for cross-domain few-shot object detection. In Proceedings of the Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition Conference , pp. 1548–1556, 2025. Peng, L., Li, W., Guo, J., Di, X., Sun, H., Li, Y., Pei, R., Wang, Y., Cao, Y., and Zha, Z.-J. Boosting real-world super-resolution with raw data: a new perspective, dataset and baseline. Peng, L., Jiang, A., Yi, Q., and Wang, M. Cumulative rain density sensing network for single image derain. IEEE Signal Processing Letters , 27:406–410, 2020. Peng, L., Jiang, A., Wei, H., Liu, B., and Wang, M. En-semble single image deraining network via progressive structural boosting constraints. Signal Processing: Image Communication , 99:116460, 2021. Peng, L., Cao, Y., Pei, R., Li, W., Guo, J., Fu, X., Wang, Y., and Zha, Z.-J. Efficient real-world image super-resolution via adaptive directional gradient convolution. 

arXiv preprint arXiv:2405.07023 , 2024a. Peng, L., Cao, Y., Sun, Y., and Wang, Y. Lightweight adap-tive feature de-drifting for compressed image classifica-tion. IEEE Transactions on Multimedia , 26:6424–6436, 2024b. Peng, L., Li, W., Guo, J., Di, X., Sun, H., Li, Y., Pei, R., Wang, Y., Cao, Y., and Zha, Z.-J. Unveiling hidden de-tails: A raw data-enhanced paradigm for real-world super-resolution. arXiv preprint arXiv:2411.10798 , 2024c. Peng, L., Li, W., Pei, R., Ren, J., Xu, J., Wang, Y., Cao, Y., and Zha, Z.-J. Towards realistic data generation for real-world super-resolution. arXiv preprint arXiv:2406.07255 ,2024d. Peng, L., Di, X., Feng, Z., Li, W., Pei, R., Wang, Y., Fu, X., Cao, Y., and Zha, Z.-J. Directing mamba to complex textures: An efficient texture-aware state space model for image restoration. arXiv preprint arXiv:2501.16583 ,2025a. Peng, L., Wang, Y., Di, X., Fu, X., Cao, Y., Zha, Z.-J., et al. Boosting image de-raining via central-surrounding syner-gistic convolution. In Proceedings of the AAAI Confer-ence on Artificial Intelligence , volume 39, pp. 6470–6478, 2025b. Peng, L., Wu, A., Li, W., Xia, P., Dai, X., Zhang, X., Di, X., Sun, H., Pei, R., Wang, Y., et al. Pixel to gaussian: Ultra-fast continuous super-resolution with 2d gaussian modeling. arXiv preprint arXiv:2503.06617 , 2025c. Qi, X., Li, R., Peng, L., Ling, Q., Yu, J., Chen, Z., Chang, P., Han, M., and Xiao, J. Data-free knowledge distillation with diffusion models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2504.00870 ,2025. Qiu, X., Hu, J., Zhou, L., Wu, X., Du, J., Zhang, B., Guo, C., Zhou, A., Jensen, C. S., Sheng, Z., and Yang, B. TFB: Towards comprehensive and fair benchmarking of time series forecasting methods. In Proc. VLDB Endow. , pp. 2363–2377, 2024. Qiu, X., Cheng, H., Wu, X., Hu, J., and Guo, C. A com-prehensive survey of deep learning for multivariate time series forecasting: A channel strategy perspective. arXiv preprint arXiv:2502.10721 , 2025a. Qiu, X., Li, Z., Qiu, W., Hu, S., Zhou, L., Wu, X., Li, Z., Guo, C., Zhou, A., Sheng, Z., Hu, J., Jensen, C. S., and Yang, B. Tab: Unified benchmarking of time series anomaly detection methods. In Proc. VLDB Endow. ,2025b. Qiu, X., Wu, X., Cheng, H., Liu, X., Guo, C., Hu, J., and Yang, B. Dbloss: Decomposition-based loss function for time series forecasting. In NeurIPS , 2025c. Qiu, X., Wu, X., Lin, Y., Guo, C., Hu, J., and Yang, B. DUET: Dual clustering enhanced multivariate time series forecasting. In SIGKDD , pp. 1185–1196, 2025d. 18 Title Suppressed Due to Excessive Size 

Qiu, X., Zhu, Y., Li, Z., Cheng, H., Wu, X., Guo, C., Yang, B., and Hu, J. Dag: A dual causal network for time series forecasting with exogenous variables. arXiv preprint arXiv:2509.14933 , 2025e. Qu, Y., Fu, D., and Fan, J. Subject information extraction for novelty detection with domain shifts. arXiv preprint arXiv:2504.21247 , 2025a. Qu, Y., Panariello, M., Todisco, M., and Evans, N. Reference-free adversarial sex obfuscation in speech. 

arXiv preprint arXiv:2508.02295 , 2025b. Ren, B., Li, Y., Mehta, N., Timofte, R., Yu, H., Wan, C., Hong, Y., Han, B., Wu, Z., Zou, Y., et al. The ninth ntire 2024 efficient super-resolution challenge report. In 

Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition , pp. 6595–6631, 2024a. Ren, J., Li, W., Chen, H., Pei, R., Shao, B., Guo, Y., Peng, L., Song, F., and Zhu, L. Ultrapixel: Advancing ultra high-resolution image synthesis to new peaks. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , 37:111131– 111171, 2024b. Ren, Y., Lu, S., and Kong, A. W.-K. All that glitters is not gold: Key-secured 3d secrets within 3d gaussian splatting. 

arXiv preprint arXiv:2503.07191 , 2025. Rombach, R., Blattmann, A., Lorenz, D., Esser, P., and Ommer, B. High-resolution image synthesis with la-tent diffusion models. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR) , 2022. Rong, X., Huang, W., Liang, J., Bi, J., Xiao, X., Li, Y., Du, B., and Ye, M. Backdoor cleaning without ex-ternal guidance in mllm fine-tuning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2505.16916 , 2025. Shamshad, F., Bakr, T., Shaaban, Y., Hussein, N., Nan-dakumar, K., and Lukas, N. First-place solution to the neurips 2024 invisible watermark removal challenge. 

arXiv preprint arXiv:2508.21072 , 2025. Shi, Y., Xue, C., Liew, J. H., Pan, J., Yan, H., Zhang, W., Tan, V. Y. F., and Bai, S. Dragdiffusion: Harnessing diffu-sion models for interactive point-based image editing. In 

Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR) , 2024. Song, J., Meng, C., and Ermon, S. Denoising diffusion implicit models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2010.02502 , 2020. Sun, H., Li, W., Liu, J., Zhou, K., Chen, Y., Guo, Y., Li, Y., Pei, R., Peng, L., and Yang, Y. Text boosts general-ization: A plug-and-play captioner for real-world image restoration. Sun, H., Li, W., Liu, J., Zhou, K., Chen, Y., Guo, Y., Li, Y., Pei, R., Peng, L., and Yang, Y. Beyond pixels: Text enhances generalization in real-world image restoration. 

arXiv preprint arXiv:2412.00878 , 2024. Sun, Y., Xie, Z., Chen, Y., Huang, X., and Hu, Q. Solar wind speed prediction with two-dimensional attention mecha-nism. Space Weather , 19(7):e2020SW002707, 2021. Sun, Y., Xie, Z., Chen, Y., and Hu, Q. Accurate solar wind speed prediction with multimodality information. Space: Science & Technology , 2022. Sun, Y., Eldele, E., Xie, Z., Wang, Y., Niu, W., Hu, Q., Kwoh, C. K., and Wu, M. Adapting llms to time se-ries forecasting via temporal heterogeneity modeling and semantic alignment. arXiv preprint arXiv:2508.07195 ,2025a. Sun, Y., Xie, Z., Chen, D., Eldele, E., and Hu, Q. Hi-erarchical classification auxiliary network for time se-ries forecasting. In Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence , volume 39, pp. 20743–20751, 2025b. Sun, Y., Xie, Z., Eldele, E., Chen, D., Hu, Q., and Wu, M. Learning pattern-specific experts for time series fore-casting under patch-level distribution shift. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , 2025c. Sun, Y., Xie, Z., Xing, H., Yu, H., and Hu, Q. Ppgf: Probabil-ity pattern-guided time series forecasting. IEEE Transac-tions on Neural Networks and Learning Systems , 2025d. Tancik, M., Mildenhall, B., and Ng, R. Stegastamp: Invisi-ble hyperlinks in physical photographs. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR) , 2020. Tian, Y., Chen, S., Xu, Z., Wang, Y., Bi, J., Han, P., and Wang, W. Reinforcement mid-training, 2025. URL 

https://arxiv.org/abs/2509.24375 .Wang, H., Peng, L., Sun, Y., Wan, Z., Wang, Y., and Cao, Y. Brightness perceiving for recursive low-light image en-hancement. IEEE Transactions on Artificial Intelligence ,5(6):3034–3045, 2023a. Wang, Y., Peng, L., Li, L., Cao, Y., and Zha, Z.-J. Decoupling-and-aggregating for image exposure correc-tion. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF conference on com-puter vision and pattern recognition , pp. 18115–18124, 2023b. Wang, Y., Bi, J., Ma, Y., and Pirk, S. Ascd: Attention-steerable contrastive decoding for reducing hallucination in mllm. arXiv preprint arXiv:2506.14766 , 2025a. 19 Title Suppressed Due to Excessive Size 

Wang, Y., Liang, Z., Zhang, F., Tian, L., Wang, L., Li, J., Yang, J., Timofte, R., Guo, Y., Jin, K., et al. Ntire 2025 challenge on light field image super-resolution: Methods and results. In Proceedings of the Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition Conference , pp. 1227–1246, 2025b. Wang, Z., Bovik, A. C., Sheikh, H. R., and Simoncelli, E. P. Image quality assessment: From error visibility to structural similarity. IEEE Transactions on Image Processing , 2004. Wu, A., Peng, L., Di, X., Dai, X., Wu, C., Wang, Y., Fu, X., Cao, Y., and Zha, Z.-J. Robustgs: Unified boosting of feedforward 3d gaussian splatting under low-quality conditions. arXiv preprint arXiv:2508.03077 , 2025a. Wu, B., Zou, C., Li, C., Huang, D., Yang, F., Tan, H., Peng, J., Wu, J., Xiong, J., Jiang, J., et al. Hunyuanvideo 1.5 technical report. arXiv preprint arXiv:2511.18870 ,2025b. Wu, C., Wang, L., Peng, L., Lu, D., and Zheng, Z. Dropout the high-rate downsampling: A novel design paradigm for uhd image restoration. In 2025 IEEE/CVF Winter Conference on Applications of Computer Vision (WACV) ,pp. 2390–2399. IEEE, 2025c. Wu, H., Yang, Y., Chen, H., Ren, J., and Zhu, L. Mask-guided progressive network for joint raindrop and rain streak removal in videos. In Proceedings of the 31st ACM International Conference on Multimedia , pp. 7216–7225, 2023. Wu, H., Yang, Y., Aviles-Rivero, A. I., Ren, J., Chen, S., Chen, H., and Zhu, L. Semi-supervised video desnowing network via temporal decoupling experts and distribution-driven contrastive regularization. In European Confer-ence on Computer Vision , pp. 70–89. Springer, 2024a. Wu, H., Yang, Y., Xu, H., Wang, W., Zhou, J., and Zhu, L. Rainmamba: Enhanced locality learning with state space models for video deraining. In Proceedings of the 32nd ACM International Conference on Multimedia , pp. 7881–7890, 2024b. Wu, H., Wu, Y., Jiang, J., Wu, C., Wang, H., and Zheng, Y. Samvsr: Leveraging semantic priors to zone-focused mamba for video snow removal. In Proceedings of the 33rd ACM International Conference on Multimedia , pp. 7376–7385, 2025d. Wu, X., Qiu, X., Gao, H., Hu, J., Yang, B., and Guo, C. K2VAE: A koopman-kalman enhanced variational au-toencoder for probabilistic time series forecasting. In 

ICML , 2025e. Wu, X., Qiu, X., Li, Z., Wang, Y., Hu, J., Guo, C., Xiong, H., and Yang, B. CATCH: Channel-aware multivariate time series anomaly detection via frequency patching. In 

ICLR , 2025f. Xia, P., Peng, L., Di, X., Pei, R., Wang, Y., Cao, Y., and Zha, Z.-J. S3mamba: Arbitrary-scale super-resolution via scaleable state space model. arXiv preprint arXiv:2411.11906 , 6, 2024. Xiao, F., Hu, S., Shen, Y., Fang, C., Huang, J., He, C., Tang, L., Yang, Z., and Li, X. A survey of camouflaged object detection and beyond. CAAI AIR , 2024. Xie, Z. Conquer: Context-aware representation with query enhancement for text-based person search. arXiv preprint arXiv:2601.18625 , 2026. Xie, Z., Wang, C., Wang, Y., Cai, S., Wang, S., and Jin, T. Chat-driven text generation and interaction for person retrieval. In Proceedings of the 2025 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing , pp. 5259–5270, 2025. Xie, Z., Liu, X., Zhang, B., Lin, Y., Cai, S., and Jin, T. Hvd: Human vision-driven video representation learning for text-video retrieval. arXiv preprint arXiv:2601.16155 ,2026a. Xie, Z., Zhang, B., Lin, Y., and Jin, T. Delving deeper: Hier-archical visual perception for robust video-text retrieval. 

arXiv preprint arXiv:2601.12768 , 2026b. Xu, H., Peng, L., Song, S., Liu, X., Jun, M., Li, S., Yu, J., and Mao, X. Camel: Energy-aware llm infer-ence on resource-constrained devices. arXiv preprint arXiv:2508.09173 , 2025a. Xu, J., Li, W., Sun, H., Li, F., Wang, Z., Peng, L., Ren, J., Yang, H., Hu, X., Pei, R., et al. Fast image super-resolution via consistency rectified flow. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer Vision , pp. 11755–11765, 2025b. Yakovenko, A., Chakvetadze, G., Khrapov, I., Zhelezov, M., Vatolin, D., Timofte, R., Oh, Y., Kwon, J., Park, J., Cho, N. I., et al. Aim 2025 low-light raw video denoising challenge: Dataset, methods and results. arXiv preprint arXiv:2508.16830 , 2025. Yan, Q., Jiang, A., Chen, K., Peng, L., Yi, Q., and Zhang, C. Textual prompt guided image restoration. Engineering Applications of Artificial Intelligence , 155:110981, 2025. Yu, X., Chen, Z., Zhang, Y., Lu, S., Shen, R., Zhang, J., Hu, X., Fu, Y., and Yan, S. Visual document understand-ing and question answering: A multi-agent collabora-tion framework with test-time scaling. arXiv preprint arXiv:2508.03404 , 2025. 20 Title Suppressed Due to Excessive Size 

Zeng, Z., Huang, J., Zheng, L., Han, W., Zhong, Y., Chen, L., Yang, L., Chu, Y., He, Y., and Ma, L. Uitron: Founda-tional gui agent with advanced perception and planning. 

arXiv preprint arXiv:2508.21767 , 2025. Zhang, G., Bi, J., Gu, J., Chen, Y., and Tresp, V. Spot! revisiting video-language models for event understanding. 

arXiv preprint arXiv:2311.12919 , 2023. Zhang, L., Liu, X., Martin, A. V., Bearfield, C. X., Brun, Y., and Guan, H. Attack-resilient image watermarking using stable diffusion. arXiv preprint arXiv:2401.04247 , 2024. Zhang, R., Isola, P., Efros, A. A., Shechtman, E., and Wang, O. The unreasonable effectiveness of deep features as a perceptual metric. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR) , 2018. Zhang, S., Guo, Y., Peng, L., Wang, Z., Chen, Y., Li, W., Zhang, X., Zhang, Y., and Chen, J. Vividface: High-quality and efficient one-step diffusion for video face enhancement. arXiv preprint arXiv:2509.23584 , 2025. Zhao, X., Zhang, K., Su, Z., Vasan, S., Grishchenko, I., Kruegel, C., Vigna, G., Wang, Y.-X., and Li, L. Invisible image watermarks are provably removable using gener-ative ai. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS) , 2024. Zheng, Y., Zhong, B., Liang, Q., Tang, Z., Ji, R., and Li, X. Leveraging local and global cues for visual tracking via parallel interaction network. IEEE Transactions on Circuits and Systems for Video Technology , 33(4):1671– 1683, 2022. Zheng, Y., Zhong, B., Liang, Q., Li, G., Ji, R., and Li, X. Toward unified token learning for vision-language tracking. IEEE Transactions on Circuits and Systems for Video Technology , 34(4):2125–2135, 2023. Zheng, Y., Zhong, B., Liang, Q., Mo, Z., Zhang, S., and Li, X. Odtrack: Online dense temporal token learning for visual tracking. In Proceedings of the AAAI conference on artificial intelligence , volume 38, pp. 7588–7596, 2024. Zheng, Y., Zhong, B., Liang, Q., Li, N., and Song, S. De-coupled spatio-temporal consistency learning for self-supervised tracking. In Proceedings of the AAAI Con-ference on Artificial Intelligence , volume 39, pp. 10635– 10643, 2025a. Zheng, Y., Zhong, B., Liang, Q., Zhang, S., Li, G., Li, X., and Ji, R. Towards universal modal tracking with online dense temporal token learning. IEEE Transactions on Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence , 2025b. Zhou, S., Li, L., Zhang, X., Zhang, B., Bai, S., Sun, M., Zhao, Z., Lu, X., and Chu, X. LiDAR-PTQ: Post-training quantization for point cloud 3d object detection. 2024. Zhou, S., Wang, S., Yuan, Z., Shi, M., Shang, Y., and Yang, D. GSQ-tuning: Group-shared exponents integer in fully quantized training for LLMs on-device fine-tuning. In 

Findings of the Association for Computational Linguis-tics: ACL 2025 , pp. 22971–22988, Vienna, Austria, July 2025a. Association for Computational Linguistics. ISBN 979-8-89176-256-5. Zhou, S., Yuan, Z., Yang, D., Hu, X., Qian, J., and Zhao, Z. Pillarhist: A quantization-aware pillar feature encoder based on height-aware histogram. In Proceedings of the Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition Conference , pp. 27336–27345, 2025b. Zhou, Z., Lu, S., Leng, S., Zhang, S., Lian, Z., Yu, X., and Kong, A. W.-K. Dragflow: Unleashing dit priors with region based supervision for drag editing. arXiv preprint arXiv:2510.02253 , 2025c. Zhu, J., Kaplan, R., Johnson, J., and Fei-Fei, L. Hidden: Hiding data with deep networks. In Proceedings of the European Conference on Computer Vision (ECCV) , 2018. 21