Title: Transformation-driven generation of comparable projection images from multimodal anatomical scenes

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2606.16573v1

Published Time: Tue, 16 Jun 2026 02:08:18 GMT

Number of Pages: 36

Markdown Content:
# Transformation-driven generation of comparable projection images from multimodal anatomical scenes 

Dariusz Pojda a, ∗, Krzysztof Domino a, Michał Tarnawski a, Agnieszka Anna Tomaka a

> aInstitute of Theoretical and Applied Informatics, Polish Academy of Sciences, Bałtycka 5, 44-100, Gliwice, Poland

Abstract 

This work addresses the computational problem of generating reproducible projection-space observations from heterogeneous anatomical scenes whose components may un-dergo independent spatial transformations. We propose a transformation-driven frame-work for synthetic projection imaging from multimodal anatomical data and demonstrate it on mandibular-motion scenarios. In contrast to conventional Digitally Reconstructed Radiograph (DRR) approaches primarily designed for registration, projection realism, or rendering efficiency, the pro-posed formulation treats projection imaging as an observation process operating on an explicitly represented anatomical scene. Independently transformable volumetric and surface-based anatomical objects are embedded within a shared scene representation and propagated directly into projection space through explicit transformations. Projection geometry, acquisition modelling, ma-terial interpretation, and image presentation remain explicitly separated, enabling con-trolled exploration of methodological assumptions while preserving reproducibility and direct comparability between generated projections. Particular emphasis is placed on transformation-driven anatomical scenarios relevant to craniofacial analysis, including mandibular motion and therapeutic repositioning. Us-ing a shared anatomical reference scene composed of CT/CBCT volumes, segmented structures, surface models, and auxiliary anatomical or therapeutic objects, the frame-work enables generation of directly comparable VirtualRTG projections from multiple anatomical configurations while preserving identical imaging assumptions. Rather than aiming at fully physically faithful radiographic simulation, the proposed approach provides a controllable and reproducible methodological environment for study-ing anatomy–projection relationships, motion observability, and transformation-aware imaging workflows. 

Keywords: projection imaging, DRR, multimodal anatomical scenes, transformation-driven imaging, anatomical motion, virtual radiography, medical imaging 

> ∗Corresponding author, e–mail: dpojda@iitis.pl
> arXiv:2606.16573v1 [cs.CV] 15 Jun 2026

1. Introduction 

Advances in radiographic imaging have enabled observation of anatomical structures during motion through dynamic acquisition techniques. At the same time, increasing awareness of the harmful effects of ionising radiation has reinforced the need to restrict imaging procedures to clinically justified scenarios. In practice, dynamic radiographic imaging remains additionally constrained by trade-offs between spatial and temporal resolution, limited repeatability of motion conditions, and difficulties in performing con-trolled methodological experiments. These limitations motivate the development of synthetic projection imaging meth-ods capable of generating repeatable and controllable radiographic scenarios without re-peated exposure. Although virtual X-ray and Digitally Reconstructed Radiograph (DRR) methodologies have been studied for decades, contemporary multimodal computational environments introduce new requirements associated with heterogeneous anatomical data and explicit modelling of anatomical motion. Modern volumetric imaging techniques, particularly CT and CBCT, provide high-resolution anatomical representations of craniofacial structures, including skeletal anatomy, dentition, and selected soft tissues. At the same time, segmentation, registration, and treatment-planning workflows increasingly operate on multimodal anatomical scenes in which volumetric datasets coexist with segmented surfaces, dental scans, therapeutic appliances, and auxiliary geometric models. Such entities often remain represented as independent objects possessing explicit spatial relationships and transformation histories originating from registration, motion tracking, biomechanical simulation, or treatment planning. In contemporary multimodal anatomical workflows, the computational object of in-terest is often not a single volume but a scene composed of several spatially related enti-ties, including CT or CBCT volumes, segmented anatomical components, optical surface scans, reconstructed meshes, landmarks, trajectories, and treatment-related geometries. Reducing such a scene to one resampled volume may simplify projection generation, but it also hides object-specific transformations, may introduce interpolation artefacts, and makes it difficult to analyse how individual anatomical changes affect the resulting projection. The proposed framework therefore keeps anatomical entities as independent scene objects and evaluates their current spatial state during projection generation. A particularly relevant application concerns mandibular motion analysis, impor-tant in temporomandibular joint assessment, orthodontics, prosthodontics, craniofacial biomechanics, and therapeutic occlusal repositioning. Clinically relevant scenarios fre-quently involve predefined anatomical configurations, including protrusion, lateral mo-tion, controlled mouth opening, or splint-related therapeutic repositioning. Repeated radiographic acquisition for such scenarios is often impractical due to radiation burden, limited repeatability of positioning, and restricted experimental control. In such settings, projection imaging may be reformulated not as an isolated rendering or reconstruction problem, but as a controlled simulation of projection-space observa-tions generated from explicitly represented anatomy and anatomical transformations embedded within a computational scene. This perspective motivates the concept of 2transformation-driven projection imaging , in which synthetic projection images emerge directly from known scene geometry and object transformations. Consequently, a shared anatomical reference scene, derived from a single CT/CBCT acquisition, segmented vol-umetric components, or multiple registered volumetric and surface-based sources, may be used for systematic exploration of multiple anatomical configurations while preserving identical acquisition geometry and imaging assumptions. 

1.1. Contributions of this work 

In contrast to conventional DRR frameworks primarily designed for image regis-tration, projection realism, or computational acceleration, the present work introduces a scene-oriented computational formulation of synthetic projection imaging. Projec-tion images are treated as simulated observations of a transformation-aware anatomical scene rather than as isolated renderings of a single pre-resampled volume. As a re-sult, projection-space representations emerge as deterministic consequences of explicitly represented anatomy, spatial relationships, and scene transformations. The principal methodological contribution of this work is the formulation of projec-tion imaging as a transformation-aware process in which anatomical motion and alter-native anatomical configurations are propagated directly into projection space through explicit scene transformations. Within this formulation, anatomical structures are repre-sented as independently transformable volumetric and surface-based objects embedded in a shared hierarchical scene model, enabling heterogeneous anatomical representations to coexist while preserving explicit spatial relationships. A further contribution lies in the explicit separation of anatomical representation, projection geometry, acquisition modelling, material interpretation, and presentation. Such decomposition enables controlled methodological experimentation in which the influence of individual modelling assumptions may be analysed independently without modifying the remaining stages of the projection pipeline. The framework additionally enables repeated generation of directly comparable Vir-tualRTG projections for multiple anatomical configurations derived from a shared anatom-ical reference scene. Such a scene may include a single CT/CBCT dataset, segmented volumetric components, multiple registered volumetric datasets, surface models, dental scans, therapeutic appliances, and auxiliary geometric objects, while preserving identical acquisition geometry, material assumptions, and presentation settings. Such functionality is particularly relevant in scenarios where repeated radiographic acquisition would be impractical or undesirable. By deriving multiple projection images from a common anatomical reference scene, the framework enables systematic investi-gation of projection-space effects induced by anatomically defined transformations, such as mandibular motion, TMJ repositioning, orthodontic treatment planning, or occlusal-splint-related changes, without requiring additional patient exposure. Finally, the proposed framework is implemented in Python within pyDpVision , a Python-based research environment derived from the dpVision platform [1], and is eval-uated using synthetic and real anatomical projection scenarios, including multimodal scene integration, alternative projection backends, and transformation-aware motion ex-periments. The framework is intended primarily as a research and experimentation 3platform for studying relationships between anatomy, transformations, and projection-space observations. The design prioritises explicit scene representation, reproducibility of experimental conditions, and flexibility of anatomical transformations over maximisa-tion of computational throughput. Consequently, computational performance is not the primary optimisation target of the present work. The proposed projection framework extends the transformation-tree paradigm previously introduced for multimodal image registration and data integration [2] into the domain of synthetic projection imaging. Importantly, the contribution of the present work does not lie in a new attenua-tion model or DRR rendering algorithm. Instead, it lies in the formulation of projec-tion imaging as an observation process operating on a transformation-aware multimodal anatomical scene, where projection generation constitutes one component of a broader scene-management framework. The computational-science role of the proposed framework can be summarised as a controlled simulation pipeline linking multimodal anatomical scene representation, transformation modelling, projection acquisition, and comparable projection-space ob-servations (Table 1). 

> Table 1: Computational-science interpretation of the proposed transformation-driven projection frame-work.

Component Role in the proposed framework Input A multimodal anatomical scene composed of volumetric datasets, seg-mented structures, surface models, landmarks, trajectories, and aux-iliary or treatment-related geometries. Model A transformation hierarchy combined with an explicit projection op-erator, allowing independently represented objects to preserve their spatial relationships and transformation histories. Simulation Controlled projection generation under configurable acquisition as-sumptions, including projection geometry, ray integration strategy, material-response model, depth limitation, and presentation settings. Output Directly comparable synthetic projection-space observations gener-ated from alternative anatomical configurations while preserving iden-tical imaging assumptions. Use Methodological analysis of anatomy–projection relationships, motion observability, transformation-aware validation datasets, planning sce-narios, and controlled comparison of projection strategies. 

2. Related Work 

Synthetic projection imaging and Digitally Reconstructed Radiographs (DRRs) are commonly formulated as computational models of X-ray image formation based on atten-uation of radiation along source–detector paths, typically described by the Beer–Lambert law [3, 4]: 4I = I0 exp 

> (

−

> ∫

μ(s) d s

> )

.

In practice, synthetic projection generation reduces to numerical estimation of at-tenuation along rays traversing an anatomical representation. Depending on modelling assumptions, radiographic simulation may additionally incorporate detector response, blur, noise, scattering, or secondary interactions. However, many practical DRR frame-works adopt simplified assumptions to maintain computational tractability. For volumetric representations such as CT or CBCT, attenuation integration is typ-ically performed using voxel-traversal or interpolation-based strategies. The Siddon 

method [5] computes exact voxel intersections, whereas Jacobs [6] introduces an incre-mental optimisation of Siddon traversal. Alternatively, the Joseph approach [7] approx-imates attenuation through sampled interpolation along rays and remains widely used due to its favourable balance between numerical accuracy and computational efficiency. Other formulations include voxel-driven or footprint-based approaches for efficient pro-jection generation [8, 9, 10], while Monte Carlo frameworks such as Geant4 [11] provide physically realistic modelling of photon transport and detector response at substantially higher computational cost. More advanced formulations additionally incorporate wave-based effects, such as phase-contrast X-ray simulation [12]. Beyond projection generation itself, DRR methodologies have been widely used for 2D–3D registration between CT and fluoroscopic imagery, intraoperative visualisation, panoramic reconstruction, and CBCT-derived cephalometric analysis. Registration-oriented frameworks commonly employ DRRs as an intermediate representation en-abling alignment between volumetric anatomy and projection-space observations [13, 14]. Increasing clinical demand further motivated acceleration strategies for near real-time projection generation [15]. In dentistry and craniomaxillofacial imaging, CBCT-derived projections have been applied to panoramic reconstruction, cephalometric anal-ysis, and geometry-aware projection synthesis [16, 17, 18, 19], while several studies demonstrated diagnostic comparability of CBCT-derived cephalograms with conven-tional radiographs [20, 21, 22]. Recent developments additionally explore dynamic imag-ing and differentiable DRR formulations for motion analysis and inverse optimisation problems [23, 24]. Despite substantial progress, several methodological limitations remain. First, most existing DRR approaches are organised around one or more volumet-ric datasets and primarily target image registration, projection realism, tomographic reconstruction, or computational acceleration. In contrast, contemporary multimodal workflows frequently operate on heterogeneous anatomical scenes composed of volu-metric datasets, segmented anatomical structures, surface models, treatment-related geometries, annotations, and motion-tracking outputs linked through explicit spatial relationships. Second, existing methodologies predominantly address static anatomical configura-tions or short-term image-alignment tasks. Comparatively less attention has been de-voted to frameworks supporting systematic generation of multiple directly comparable 5projection-space representations corresponding to explicitly defined anatomical transfor-mations and motion scenarios, particularly in craniomaxillofacial applications involving mandibular kinematics, therapeutic repositioning, or occlusal splints. Third, although physically realistic and differentiable DRR frameworks continue to evolve, relatively fewer studies focus on transparent and reproducible projection environ-ments in which anatomy, transformations, projection geometry, acquisition assumptions, and presentation remain explicitly represented and independently controllable. Contemporary frameworks such as Plastimatch [25], RTK [26], TIGRE [27], and DeepDRR [28] represent important advances in DRR generation, image registration, tomographic reconstruction, and realistic radiographic simulation. Although these sys-tems differ in implementation details and modelling assumptions, projection generation is typically formulated with respect to one or more volumetric datasets and a specified acquisition geometry. While these frameworks provide powerful projection-generation ca-pabilities, their primary focus lies on projection rendering, reconstruction, registration, or simulation rather than management of multimodal anatomical scenes represented as independently transformable objects. To the best of our knowledge, none of these frameworks provides a general scene-oriented representation in which multiple independently transformable volumetric and surface-based anatomical objects can be combined, manipulated, and projected within a common transformation hierarchy while preserving direct comparability between alter-native anatomical configurations. The framework proposed in the present work adopts a different perspective. Rather than treating projection generation as a volume-centred operation, it treats projection images as observations of a transformation-aware anatomical scene composed of inde-pendently transformable volumetric and surface-based objects. Consequently, anatomi-cal motion, multimodal integration, therapeutic configurations, anatomical annotations, and alternative projection scenarios are represented within a common scene model and propagated directly into projection space through explicit transformations. The primary objective is therefore not maximisation of projection realism or com-putational performance, but support for controlled generation of directly comparable projection images from complex multimodal anatomical scenes. The present work ad-dresses the above limitations through a transformation-driven projection-imaging frame-work supporting independently transformable multimodal anatomical objects, repeated generation of comparable projections for controlled anatomical configurations, and ex-plicit integration of motion-related scenarios, with particular emphasis on mandibular movement and therapy-related positioning. From this perspective, the primary objective is not merely projection generation itself, but the creation of a controlled experimental environment for studying how explicitly defined anatomical transformations manifest in projection space. 

3. Method 

The methodological objective of the proposed framework is generation of multiple anatomically consistent synthetic projection images from a shared anatomical reference 6scene under controlled anatomical transformations. Rather than treating projection generation as an isolated rendering problem, the proposed approach formulates image formation as a downstream consequence of explicitly represented anatomy, projection geometry, acquisition assumptions, and presentation rules. In contrast to approaches requiring repeated acquisition or reconstruction of sep-arate volumetric datasets for alternative imaging scenarios, the proposed framework assumes repeated reuse of a shared anatomical scene. Depending on the application, this scene may consist of a single CT/CBCT volume, segmented volumetric compo-nents derived from one acquisition, or multiple registered volumetric and surface-based models originating from different sources. Anatomical configurations are then modified through explicitly represented spatial transformations. Clinically relevant examples in-clude therapeutic mandibular repositioning, occlusal splints, protrusion, lateral motion, or controlled mouth opening. For clarity, we summarise the proposed decomposition using the following abstract notation: 

Idisplay = P(A(S, G, ΘA) , ΘP ) ,

where S denotes an anatomical scene composed of independently transformable objects and their spatial relationships, G defines projection geometry, ΘA represents acquisition parameters, including sampling, attenuation modelling, material interpretation, and ray integration, while ΘP denotes presentation parameters responsible for the final visual appearance of the image. The operator A corresponds to synthetic projection acquisition, whereas P represents post-acquisition presentation and visual interpretation of the generated signal. This distinction explicitly separates projection-space information resulting from anatomical and acquisition assumptions from display-related choices such as contrast, inversion, tonal mapping, or display windowing. This notation extends the standard DRR image-formation view, in which attenua-tion is accumulated along source–detector rays and converted into image intensity, by explicitly separating scene representation, acquisition assumptions, and presentation. Because transformation-driven imaging assumes repeated generation of comparable projections under controlled anatomical motion and heterogeneous multimodal data, the framework adopts an explicit methodological decomposition. In particular, the method separates anatomical scene representation and spatial reference modelling, projection geometry, projection acquisition and attenuation modelling, and presentation from one another. Such separation enables independent analysis of the influence of anatomical transformations, acquisition geometry, material assumptions, and presentation strategy while preserving repeated reuse of the same anatomical scene across multiple controlled imaging experiments. 

3.1. Methodological assumptions and computational environment 

The proposed framework assumes that anatomical structures remain represented as independent scene objects throughout the projection workflow. Rather than being merged into a single resampled volume, anatomical components such as bones, teeth, 7soft tissues, therapeutic appliances, and auxiliary geometric models preserve their own coordinate systems and spatial transformations. This assumption reflects the organisation of multimodal computational environments used in registration, treatment planning, and motion analysis, where heterogeneous anatomical representations coexist and are related through explicit transformations. Consequently, synthetic projection generation is formulated as a transformation-aware observation of an anatomical scene rather than as a projection of a pre-computed unified volume. Alternative anatomical configurations are represented through modi-fications of scene transformations, while projection geometry and imaging parameters remain independently configurable. The framework follows a modular architecture comprising scene representation, pro-jection geometry, acquisition, material-response modelling, and image presentation (Fig. 1). Separation of these stages enables independent experimentation with anatomical trans-formations, acquisition assumptions, attenuation models, and visualisation strategies while preserving a common anatomical reference.   

> Anatomical scene (objects + transformations)
> Projection geometry (source + detector)
> Acquisition model (ray integration / sampling)
> Material response (attenuation mapping)
> Presentation model (windowing / contrast / gamma)
> VirtualRTG image (output projection)
> Scene transformations mandibular motion registration / trajectories
> Acquisition parameters source geometry slab / depth limitation
> Display parameters windowing / contrast / gamma / inversion
> Figure 1: Methodological decomposition of the proposed projection framework. Synthetic projection generation is organised into explicit stages comprising anatomical scene representation, projection ge-ometry, acquisition, material-response modelling, and presentation. Separation of these stages enables independent experimentation with imaging geometry, anatomical transformations, material assumptions, and presentation strategies while preserving a common anatomical scene representation.

An important consequence of this formulation is the absence of mandatory resam-pling into a common projection volume. During projection generation, rays are evaluated 8directly in the current transformation state of individual scene objects, allowing indepen-dently transformable anatomical structures to participate in image formation without modification of the original data. The resulting organisation provides a reproducible environment for studying the relationships between anatomy, motion, imaging geometry, and projection-space repre-sentation under controlled conditions. 

3.2. Scene representation and coordinate transformations 

Anatomical objects participating in projection generation are represented as inde-pendent scene entities with their own coordinate systems and transformations. Con-sequently, projection generation does not require construction of a globally resampled anatomical volume. Instead, object positions are evaluated dynamically through trans-formation propagation during ray integration. The transformation hierarchy used throughout the framework follows the scene-management principles previously introduced in the transformation-tree model proposed for multimodal image registration and data integration [2]. Projection sampling is formulated as a sequence of coordinate transformations 

pref → pworld → plocal → pvoxel 

allowing anatomical objects originating from volumetric or surface-based representations to participate in multiple spatial configurations without modification of their underlying data. Beyond CT and CBCT volumes, the framework supports surface-based representa-tions described by triangular meshes. Volumetric and surface objects participate in the same transformation hierarchy, enabling construction of multimodal anatomical scenes integrating volumes, segmented structures, dentition models, therapeutic appliances, and auxiliary geometries. The same transformation chain may also be applied to anatomical annotations. Con-sequently, landmarks and paths remain spatially linked to anatomy and may be prop-agated consistently into projection space. This enables direct correspondence between three-dimensional anatomical representations and their projection-space visualisations. 

3.3. Projection geometry model 

Projection geometry is represented independently from the anatomical scene. Con-sequently, the same anatomical configuration may be projected under different acquisi-tion geometries, while identical geometry may be preserved for comparison of multiple anatomical configurations. The detector is defined by its origin oD, horizontal and vertical pixel-step vectors 

uD and vD, and image resolution H × W .The centre of detector pixel (r, c ) is given by 

pD(r, c ) = oD +

> (

c + 12

> )

uD +

> (

r + 12

> )

vD.

9The framework supports both cone-beam and parallel projection models. For cone-beam projection, rays originate from a point source s and pass through detector pixels according to 

ˆd(r, c ) = pD(r, c ) − s

∥pD(r, c ) − s∥ .

In parallel projection, all rays share a common direction, eliminating perspective effects and facilitating comparative and methodological studies. This formulation enables systematic exploration of the influence of acquisition geom-etry while preserving a common anatomical reference model. 

3.4. Volumetric integration and acquisition model 

Following projection-geometry definition, projection generation requires numerical evaluation of attenuation along rays traversing the anatomical scene. In the proposed framework, this acquisition stage may combine volumetric sources, surface-based anatom-ical structures, and optional depth-limiting constraints within a single transformation-aware projection process. The following subsections describe volumetric integration, surface-based projection, attenuation accumulation, detector response, and depth-limited projection. 

3.4.1. Volumetric integration backends 

The framework supports two volumetric integration strategies: interpolated ray sam-pling inspired by the Joseph approach [7] and exact voxel traversal based on the Siddon algorithm [5]. Both strategies evaluate attenuation along projection rays, but they differ in how the ray–volume interaction is discretised. In the Joseph-type sampling model, each projection ray is uniformly sampled along its path. For a ray originating at oR and travelling in direction ˆd, sampling locations are defined as 

p(tk) = oR + tk ˆd, tk = k∆s, 

where ∆s denotes the ray-marching step size. Local attenuation values are reconstructed by interpolation of the volumetric data at intermediate positions. In practice, trilinear interpolation provides a favourable compromise between projection smoothness, sup-pression of staircase artefacts, and computational efficiency. The Siddon-based formulation instead partitions the ray according to exact intersec-tions with voxel-boundary planes. The ordered traversal parameters 

τ0 < τ 1 < · · · < τ M

define segments fully contained within individual voxels, leading to the line integral 

I = 

> M−1∑
> m=0

μ(im) ℓm,

10 where im denotes the traversed voxel and ℓm = τm+1 − τm is the corresponding chord length. This formulation is independent of the sampling step ∆s, but assumes piecewise homogeneous attenuation within voxel boundaries. Figure 2 illustrates the difference between both integration strategies. The Joseph-type model provides flexibility and favourable computational efficiency, whereas the Siddon formulation serves as a step-size-independent reference in scenarios requiring exact voxel traversal. source S            

> detector
> t0
> t1
> t2
> . . .
> tk
> . . .
> tN−1
> tN
> ∆t
> voxel values
> μ(p(t1))
> μ(p(t2))
> μ(p(tk))
> ...
> interpolation
> →μ(p(tk))
> x
> z
> y
> source S
> detector
> ℓm
> voxel values
> μ(i1)ℓ1
> μ(i2)ℓ2
> μ(im)ℓm
> ...
> exact chord
> ℓm=τm+1 −τm
> x
> z
> y

Figure 2: Comparison of volumetric integration strategies. Left: Joseph-type sampling, in which a projection ray is discretised into sampling points separated by step ∆s and attenuation values are reconstructed through interpolation. Right: Siddon exact voxel traversal, where ray–voxel intersections partition the ray into segments fully contained within individual voxels, each contributing proportionally to its chord length ℓm.

3.4.2. Surface-based projection 

Besides volumetric attenuation sources, the framework supports anatomical struc-tures represented as triangular surface meshes. Such objects participate in the same transformation-aware projection pipeline as volumetric data, but their contribution is evaluated through ray–surface intersection rather than voxel sampling. Two surface-projection strategies are considered. The first one follows a ray-based formulation, in which each projection ray is tested against a bounding-volume hierarchy and the resulting ray–triangle intersections are accumulated along the ray path. The second one follows a detector-space formulation, in which surface triangles are projected onto the detector and stored as per-pixel intersection lists prior to attenuation accumu-lation. The ray-based formulation is conceptually direct and preserves a close geometric interpretation of ray–mesh intersections. The detector-space formulation shifts part of the computation to a preprocessing stage and may therefore be more efficient for selected projection scenarios. In both cases, surface models remain independently transformable scene objects and may be combined with volumetric data within the same projection process. 11 3.4.3. Signal accumulation and detector response 

Given local attenuation responses provided by the material-response model, pro-jection formation is performed by accumulating attenuation contributions along each projection ray. If the scene contains M active anatomical or auxiliary objects, the total attenuation response at sampling location tk is expressed as 

μtot (tk) = 

> M∑
> m=1

μm(tk),

where μm(tk) denotes the contribution of the m-th object. For the sampling-based backend, the accumulated attenuation is approximated as 

A ≈ 

> N−1∑
> k=0

μtot (tk) ∆ s, 

where N denotes the number of sampling points and ∆s is the ray-marching step. For the Siddon backend, the accumulation follows the voxel-traversal formulation introduced in the previous subsection and remains independent of ∆s.The accumulated attenuation may either be used directly, 

Iraw = A, 

or converted into detector intensity using a simplified Beer–Lambert-type model, 

Iraw = max 

> (

Ifloor , e −A)

,

where Ifloor defines a lower signal bound for numerical stability. This formulation intentionally omits scattering, polychromatic source spectra, detector-specific response, and quantum noise. The aim is therefore not a fully physical simula-tion of radiographic acquisition, but a repeatable and stable projection model suitable for comparing anatomical configurations and projection geometries under controlled as-sumptions. For cone-beam geometries, an optional distance-dependent correction may be applied as a simplified geometric intensity factor, 

G(d) =  

> (

dref 

d

> )p

,

where d is the source–detector distance, dref is a reference distance, and p controls the correction strength. 

3.4.4. Depth-limited projection (slab) 

Instead of integrating attenuation over the full ray extent, projection formation may optionally be restricted to a selected spatial interval. In the sampling-based formulation, this corresponds to limiting attenuation accumulation to 

t ∈ [tmin , t max ],

12 which leads to 

A ≈

> kmax

∑

> k=kmin

μtot (tk) ∆ s. 

Two depth-limiting strategies are supported. In the ray mode, the active interval is defined directly along each projection ray. In the planar mode, attenuation accumula-tion is restricted to a slab orthogonal to axis ˆn, such that a point p contributes only if 

smin ≤ (p − o) · ˆn ≤ smax .

Figure 3 illustrates the planar slab formulation. By restricting attenuation accumu-lation to a selected depth range, the mechanism may reduce structural superposition and improve observability of anatomically relevant regions. 

source S

detector 

smin 

smax 

active slab ˆn

o t ∈ [tmin , t max ]smax − smin 

> Figure 3: Depth-limited projection in the planar mode. Only attenuation contributions originating from the selected slab interval participate in projection formation.

3.5. Material response model 

Projection formation requires a mapping between volumetric scalar values and local attenuation response. In the proposed framework, this relation is treated as a con-figurable material-response model rather than as a strict physical simulation of X-ray propagation. This assumption is particularly important for CBCT data, where voxel values do not represent directly calibrated attenuation coefficients and may depend on the acquisition protocol, reconstruction procedure, and scanner-specific processing. Consequently, the framework separates scalar preprocessing, scalar-to-attenuation mapping, and optional material-range weighting. Prior to attenuation modelling, scalar values may be normalised to reduce dataset-dependent intensity-range variability. This preprocessing step does not constitute phys-ical calibration; it only stabilises the subsequent interpretation of scalar values across datasets. After preprocessing, local attenuation is defined by a mapping 

I 7 → μ(I),

13 where I denotes the volumetric scalar intensity and μ(I) is the corresponding local atten-uation response. Several mappings may be used, including a linear reference model and piecewise-linear formulations designed to emphasise selected anatomical components, such as mineralised structures or soft tissues. For applications requiring smooth enhancement of bone-like intensities, a soft-threshold formulation may be used. The contribution of mineralised structures is controlled by a logistic weighting function, 

w(I) = 11 + exp 

> (

− I−Tb 

> σb
> )

,

where Tb denotes the preferred transition level and σb controls transition smoothness. This avoids abrupt binary thresholding and provides a continuous transition between weakly and strongly attenuating structures. The framework also supports material windowing, which modifies attenuation before ray integration. Unlike conventional display windowing, which affects only the final visual appearance, material windowing changes the contribution of selected scalar ranges to the projection formation process: 

μfinal (I) = μ(I) wwindow (I).

This mechanism enables selective enhancement or suppression of anatomical components and supports controlled analysis of structure observability. All material-response models used in this work should be interpreted as configurable methodological assumptions rather than physically calibrated descriptions of X-ray in-teraction with tissue. Their purpose is to provide a repeatable and controllable way to analyse how different anatomical structures contribute to synthetic projection images. 

3.6. Presentation model 

An important characteristic of the proposed framework is the explicit separation between projection acquisition and image presentation. The raw projection signal repre-sents the result of the acquisition and attenuation model, whereas the displayed image is obtained through a separate presentation stage. This distinction allows contrast, inten-sity range, tonal mapping, and inversion parameters to be modified without recomputing the underlying ray integration. In general, presentation may be expressed as 

Idisplay = P (Iraw ; Θ P ),

where ΘP denotes display-related parameters such as intensity window, contrast, gamma correction, and optional inversion. These parameters influence only the visual appear-ance of the generated projection and do not modify the underlying attenuation accumu-lation. This separation is important for comparative experiments, because multiple anatom-ical configurations may be evaluated under identical acquisition assumptions while pre-sentation settings are adjusted independently for visual inspection. 14 3.7. Computational considerations and quality profiles 

The computational cost of synthetic projection generation depends primarily on de-tector resolution, the number of sampling steps along each ray, and the number of anatomical objects contributing to projection formation. For the sampling-based backend, the computational complexity may be approximated as 

T ∼ H · W · L

∆s · Nv,

where H × W denotes detector resolution, L is the average ray traversal length through the anatomical scene, ∆s is the sampling step, and Nv corresponds to the number of active volumetric objects. Consequently, increasing detector resolution or reducing the sampling step improves projection detail at the cost of increased computation time. To support controlled trade-offs between computational cost and image fidelity, the framework provides predefined quality profiles corresponding to different detector resolutions and sampling densities. The Siddon backend exhibits different scaling behaviour because the number of in-tegration segments depends on voxel-boundary traversal rather than uniform ray dis-cretisation. Nevertheless, both integration strategies expose a similar practical trade-off between projection fidelity and execution time. 

4. Transformation-driven projection imaging 

The projection framework introduced in the previous sections enables generation of synthetic radiographic images for a given anatomical configuration and acquisition ge-ometry. A central methodological extension proposed in this work is the introduction of 

transformation-driven projection imaging , in which changes in anatomical configuration are propagated directly into projection space through explicit scene transformations. Unlike conventional dynamic imaging workflows relying on repeated acquisition, re-construction of multiple volumetric datasets, or motion estimation directly in image space, the proposed framework represents anatomy as a collection of independently transformable objects embedded within a hierarchical scene representation. Projection formation therefore becomes a deterministic consequence of scene configuration rather than an isolated rendering task. In the proposed formulation, anatomical motion is represented through explicit trans-formations applied to anatomical objects participating in projection formation. Since anatomical structures remain embedded in the same scene graph throughout the work-flow, alternative anatomical configurations may be explored without modifying the un-derlying volumetric or surface-based data and without repeating acquisition. From a methodological perspective, mandibular motion constitutes a particularly natural use case. Clinically relevant configurations, including therapeutic repositioning, protrusion, lateral movement, or controlled mouth opening, may be represented as ex-plicit transformations acting on a shared anatomical scene, for example a segmented 15 CT/CBCT volume with independently transformable mandibular and cranial compo-nents, or a multimodal scene combining volumetric and surface-based anatomical repre-sentations. Consequently, multiple directly comparable VirtualRTG projections may be generated while preserving identical projection geometry, acquisition assumptions, and presentation parameters. 

4.1. Transformation-aware motion representation 

Within the proposed framework, motion is represented as an explicit change of scene configuration. Anatomical structures remain independent scene objects participating in the same hierarchical transformation model used throughout the dpVision /pyDpVision 

environment. A dynamic anatomical scene is therefore expressed as a time-dependent scene: 

S(t),

whose configuration evolves through transformations acting on selected anatomical ob-jects. For rigid anatomical motion, such as mandibular displacement, a natural represen-tation is given by a rigid transformation belonging to the SE (3) group: 

T (t) = 

> [

R(t) t(t)0 1

> ]

,

where R(t) ∈ SO (3) describes rotation, t(t) ∈ R3 translation, and t denotes either physical time or a configuration index. Under this formulation, synthetic projection generation becomes explicitly dependent on anatomical configuration: 

Idisplay (t) = P(A(S(t), G, ΘA) , ΘP ) ,

where S(t) denotes the current anatomical scene, G defines projection geometry, ΘA

represents acquisition parameters, and ΘP corresponds to presentation settings. In the simplest formulation, projection geometry remains fixed and only the anatom-ical configuration evolves over time. However, the formalism naturally admits scenarios involving dynamic source or detector trajectories. 

4.2. Transformation-driven projection scenarios 

The proposed formulation supports both discrete anatomical configurations and con-tinuous motion trajectories. Discrete scenarios correspond to explicitly defined anatomical states, including ref-erence position, therapeutic repositioning, protrusion, lateral movement, or different degrees of mouth opening. In such cases, the starting point is a shared anatomical ref-erence scene, which may consist of a single CT/CBCT volume, segmented volumetric components, multiple registered volumetric datasets, surface models, or auxiliary ther-apeutic and geometric objects. The scene is then modified through explicit anatomical 16 transformations, while projection geometry and acquisition assumptions may remain unchanged. Under this interpretation, projection imaging becomes a mapping: shared anatomical reference scene 

↓

multiple anatomical configurations 

↓

multiple comparable VirtualRTG projections Alternatively, continuous scenarios may be represented through trajectories: 

T (t) ∈ SE (3) ,

allowing generation of temporally ordered synthetic projection sequences that describe anatomical motion. Because projection geometry, attenuation modelling, and presentation may remain unchanged across all configurations, differences between generated images may be inter-preted primarily as consequences of anatomical transformations rather than acquisition variability. 

4.3. Methodological implications 

Transformation-driven projection imaging provides a controlled computational envi-ronment in which anatomy, motion, projection geometry, and image formation remain explicitly represented and independently controllable. This formulation enables systematic investigation of anatomy–projection relation-ships under controlled conditions and may support analysis of projection-space observ-ability of anatomical motion, validation of motion estimation methods, generation of reproducible reference datasets, and development of machine-learning pipelines operat-ing on projection data. A particularly important implication concerns craniomaxillofacial analysis and mandibu-lar motion. A shared anatomical reference scene may serve as a common basis for multiple therapeutic or functional configurations. In the simplest case, this scene may be derived from a single CT or CBCT acquisition; in more complex scenarios, it may combine segmented volumetric components, multiple registered CBCT volumes, surface scans, reconstructed anatomical models, and therapeutic objects. The proposed formulation should therefore be interpreted not as a replacement for clinical fluoroscopy, but as a reproducible and transformation-aware experimental frame-work enabling controlled exploration of anatomical motion in projection space. 

5. Computational evaluation and transformation-driven use cases 

The evaluation was organised around four methodological questions: (i) what com-putational cost is associated with the proposed projection backends and scene configura-tions; (ii) how sampling-based and exact voxel-traversal backends differ in accuracy and 17 performance; (iii) whether heterogeneous anatomical objects can be projected within a common transformation-aware scene without mandatory global resampling; and (iv) whether transformation-driven and depth-limited projection scenarios can improve con-trolled analysis of motion-dependent anatomical relationships. The aim of this evaluation is not to establish diagnostic equivalence with clinical radiographs, but to assess whether the proposed computational formulation supports reproducible, comparable, and transformation-aware projection experiments involving volumetric, surface-based, and multimodal anatomical representations. 

5.1. Synthetic benchmark scenes and projection backend evaluation 

All measurements were performed on purely synthetic, in-memory datasets. No disk I/O or GUI rendering is included in the reported timings. The benchmark covers three quality profiles, three volume sizes, and three scene variants (volumetric only, mesh only, and hybrid). Unless stated otherwise, all benchmarks were performed on a desktop workstation equipped with an Intel ® Core ™ Ultra 5 225 processor and 64 GB RAM (3200 MT/s), running Windows 11 Pro. No dedicated GPU acceleration was used in the reported experiments. 

Volumes. Three hollow-sphere volumes of increasing size were generated with 1 mm 

isotropic voxel spacing (i) small : 64 × 64 × 64 voxels; (ii) medium : 96 × 96 × 96 

voxels; (iii) large : 128 × 128 × 128 voxels. Each contains a hollow sphere with wall attenuation ≈ 1800 HU and interior ≈ 200 HU . Trilinear interpolation is used during sampling. 

Mesh. One axis-aligned rectangular box implant ( 24 × 12 × 50 mm , 12 triangles, scalar value 2200 HU , solid mode) is used in all mesh and hybrid scenes. Both ray-intersection backends are benchmarked separately (see Section 5.1.4). 

5.1.1. Projection geometry and quality profiles 

Cone-beam geometry: source at (0 , 0, −220) mm , detector centre at (0 , 0, 180) mm 

(source-to-detector distance 400 mm ). Physics: Beer–Lambert attenuation integral, 

μwater = 0 .02 mm −1.                  

> Table 2: Quality profile parameters used in the benchmark.
> Profile Detector Pixel size Marching step
> draft 256 ×256 0.8 mm 2.0 mm
> normal 512 ×512 0.4 mm 1.0 mm
> high 512 ×512 0.4 mm 0.5 mm

5.1.2. Performance results 

Table 3 presents total projection time and throughput per scene for all quality pro-files. Table 4 provides a unified phase breakdown for the normal profile, isolating the primary computational bottlenecks. 18 Table 3: Total projection time and throughput per scene and quality profile. Time is given in ms (or s if ≥ 1 s ). Throughput metrics: samp/s denotes attenuation samples (interpolations) per second; rays/s 

denotes fully-traversed rays per second. 

draft normal high 

Scene & Backend time samp/s rays/s time samp/s rays/s time samp/s rays/s sampling vol small ( 64 3) 40 ms 12.5M 509.7k 335 ms 12.1M 244.3k 579 ms 13.9M 141.2k vol medium ( 96 3) 101 ms 15.4M 460.2k 1.15 s 10.9M 161.9k 2.26 s 11.1M 82.7k vol large ( 128 3) 241 ms 13.6M 271.7k 2.50 s 10.5M 104.8k 4.90 s 10.8M 53.5k vol small + mesh 304 ms 2.6M 85.7k 1.51 s 4.2M 69.1k 1.94 s 6.6M 53.9k vol medium + mesh 470 ms 4.8M 126.3k 2.84 s 6.3M 83.4k 4.34 s 8.2M 54.7k vol large + mesh 636 ms 6.5M 103.0k 4.39 s 7.5M 59.7k 7.32 s 9.0M 35.8k Siddon vol small ( 64 3) 230 ms — 88.8k 857 ms — 95.4k 898 ms — 91.1k vol medium ( 96 3) 994 ms — 46.9k 3.93 s — 47.5k 3.94 s — 47.3k vol large ( 128 3) 1.96 s — 33.4k 7.85 s — 33.4k 7.76 s — 33.8k vol small + mesh 529 ms 56.6k 49.3k 2.14 s 56.0k 48.8k 2.16 s 55.3k 48.2k vol medium + mesh 1.56 s 40.5k 38.0k 6.08 s 41.5k 39.0k 6.12 s 41.2k 38.7k vol large + mesh 2.31 s 30.1k 28.4k 9.10 s 30.5k 28.8k 9.12 s 30.4k 28.7k 

analytic_bvh 

mesh only 231 ms 16.5k 8.3k 891 ms 17.1k 8.6k 877 ms 17.4k 8.8k 

Table 4: Unified phase breakdown [ms] for the normal profile across all scene configurations. Minor phases ( Depth clipping and Physics conversion ) consistently required < 1 ms and are omitted for space; percentages indicate relative share of total runtime. 

Context Scene Size Ray setup AABB Intersect. Mesh BVH Vol. Marching Total Volumetric small 23 (7%) 20 (6%) < 1 292 (87%) 335 

(Sampling) medium 25 (2%) 15 (1%) < 1 1111 (96%) 1153 

large 26 (1%) 15 (1%) < 1 2461 (98%) 2503 Volumetric small 23 (3%) 16 (2%) 819 (96%) < 1 857 

(Siddon) medium 26 (1%) 16 (0%) 3886 (99%) < 1 3929 

large 22 (0%) 16 (0%) 7807 (100%) < 1 7846 Hybrid small 23 (1%) 16 (1%) 1044 (69%) 428 (28%) 1511 

Vol+Mesh medium 23 (1%) 15 (1%) 1327 (47%) 1479 (52%) 2844 

(Sampling) large 25 (1%) 17 (0%) 1377 (31%) 2970 (68%) 4389 Hybrid small 25 (1%) 20 (1%) 2092 (98%) < 1 2137 

Vol+Mesh medium 22 (0%) 18 (0%) 6041 (99%) < 1 6081 

(Siddon) large 23 (0%) 16 (0%) 9060 (100%) < 1 9100 Mesh Only mesh_only 21 (2%) 20 (2%) 850 (95%) < 1 891 

5.1.3. Volume backend comparison: sampling vs. Siddon 

Two volumetric integration backends were compared: Joseph-type sampling, based on uniform ray marching with step size ∆s and trilinear interpolation, and Siddon voxel traversal, based on analytical voxel-boundary crossings and chord-length accumulation. Total execution times and scaling metrics are tracked under the volume-only scenarios 19 in Table 3. Figure 4 illustrates the influence of the volumetric integration backend on the syn-thetic cone-beam projection under identical geometric and acquisition setups.       

> Figure 4: Comparison of synthetic cone-beam projections generated using Joseph-type sampling ( ∆s=1 mm ) and Siddon exact voxel-traversal backends for the vol,small phantom ( 64 3, normal profile, 512 ×
> 512 px). Panel (a): sampling result. Panel (b): Siddon result. Panel (c): signed difference map (sampling – Siddon), where red/blue denote local deviations.

As expected, deviations are concentrated near high-contrast boundaries where Sid-don computes exact boundary intersections while the sampling backend approximates the integral via ray-marching. Globally, their discrepancy remains limited with a rela-tive MAE below 1.2% across all configurations (Table 5). Increasing sampling density systematically minimizes this error. Consequently, the sampling backend offers a highly efficient compromise for routine generation. For the tested datasets, relative differences remained below 1.2%, while execution times were approximately three times shorter than for Siddon traversal. Siddon therefore serves primarily as a step-independent reference formulation.   

> Table 5: Numerical difference (sampling −Siddon) for volume-only scenes evaluated on raw line-integral images.

Volume Profile MAE max |∆| Relative MAE (%) 

vol small draft 0.00857 0.38076 0.739 

normal 0.00681 0.39893 0.589 

high 0.00572 0.39890 0.496 

vol medium draft 0.01734 0.40237 1.093 

normal 0.01382 0.42005 0.873 

high 0.01218 0.40979 0.771 

vol large draft 0.02736 0.47403 1.171 

normal 0.02105 0.45935 0.900 

high 0.01843 0.46828 0.788 

20 5.1.4. Surface backend comparison 

To evaluate computational trade-offs between mesh projection strategies, both the 

analytic_bvh loop and the accelerated projected_intersection_list backends were benchmarked (Table 6). 

Table 6: Mesh-only projection performance for both surface backends (throughput in k samp/s). 

draft normal high 

Backend time k s/s time k s/s time k s/s 

analytic_bvh 231 ms 16.5 891 ms 17.1 877 ms 17.4 

projected_intersection_list 83 ms 45.6 255 ms 59.3 276 ms 54.8 

5.1.5. Projection images 

Figure 5 shows synthetic cone-beam projections for selected scene variants at the 

normal quality profile ( 512 × 512 px, step 1.0 mm ), rendered with a digital radiography presentation model (standard convention: dense = white, γ = 0 .6, contrast = 1.1). Im-ages at the draft and high profiles are visually indistinguishable for the synthetic objects used here. (a) vol_small (b) vol_small_siddon (c) vol_small + mesh      

> (d) vol_large (e) vol_large_siddon (f) vol_large + mesh

Figure 5: Synthetic cone-beam projections, normal profile ( 512 × 512 px, step 1.0 mm ). Columns: sam-pling / Siddon / sampling + mesh. Rows: small ( 64 3) / large ( 128 3) volume. 

21 5.2. Multimodal anatomical scene projection and transformation-driven scenarios 

The examples presented in this section are intended to illustrate the capabilities of the proposed transformation-driven framework when applied to heterogeneous anatomical data. The objective is not quantitative assessment of radiographic fidelity or diagnostic equivalence with clinical radiographs, but demonstration of multimodal scene integra-tion, transformation-aware projection generation, anatomical annotation propagation, and motion-related projection scenarios. Real-data experiments were therefore designed to demonstrate flexibility of scene representation rather than quantitative radiographic fidelity. A series of illustrative experiments was performed using real CBCT datasets together with surface models obtained from optical scanners and from surface reconstructions derived from volumetric data. 

5.2.1. Projection of multiple anatomical models 

Figure 6 presents synthetic projections generated from two CBCT examinations. The data consisted of anonymised retrospective datasets used exclusively for methodological demonstration, and no diagnostic conclusions were derived from them. The datasets differed in spatial resolution (voxel size: 0.288 mm and 0.200 mm, respectively) and partially covered different anatomical regions. After registration, both volumes were projected individually and as a combined multimodal scene. (a) (b) (c)  

> Figure 6: Synthetic projections generated from two CBCT datasets in the superior–inferior viewing direction. Panels (a) and (b) show projections of the individual volumes, whereas panel (c) shows the projection of the registered combined scene.

The example demonstrates that independently acquired volumetric datasets may be integrated within a common spatial reference frame and subsequently visualised through a single projection process. Such functionality may be useful in situations where several incomplete datasets provide complementary anatomical information. Because projection generation operates directly on the scene representation, the individual datasets do not need to be merged into a common resampled volume prior to visualisation. 22 The projections were generated along a superior–inferior viewing direction, with the source positioned below the head and the detector above it. Such a configuration is gen-erally unavailable in conventional radiographic acquisition and illustrates the flexibility of the virtual projection environment. Figure 7 presents a related experiment in which a CBCT volume is combined with a surface reconstruction of the craniofacial skeleton. This example illustrates the ability of the framework to jointly process volumetric and surface-based anatomical represen-tations within a common projection pipeline. At the same time, it highlights limitations associated with mesh-based projection, where inaccuracies of the triangular representa-tion or topological imperfections may introduce visible projection artefacts. (a) (b) (c)  

> Figure 7: Synthetic projections generated from a CBCT dataset and a surface model in the superior– inferior viewing direction. Panel (a) shows the projection of the CBCT volume, panel (b) shows the projection of the surface model, and panel (c) shows the projection of the combined volumetric–surface scene.

The computational cost of such multimodal projections depends on the selected pro-jection backend, acquisition parameters, and scene complexity. For surface-based mod-els, execution time additionally depends on mesh complexity, particularly on the number of triangles participating in the projection process. When multiple objects are projected simultaneously, individual computational costs accumulate, potentially increasing exe-cution times from seconds to minutes on less powerful hardware. The ability to combine heterogeneous anatomical representations is further illustrated in Figure 8, where a CBCT dataset is projected together with additional multimodal in-formation. In such scenarios, balancing the visual contribution of individual objects may become challenging, since highly attenuating structures can dominate the resulting im-age. To address this issue, the framework allows independent assignment of attenuation properties to individual surface models. From a methodological perspective, these examples demonstrate that projection imaging may be applied not only to a single volumetric acquisition but also to com-plex multimodal anatomical scenes containing data originating from different imaging modalities. Such integration may potentially reduce the extent of volumetric acquisi-tion required for a given task by complementing selected anatomical structures with 23 (a) (b) (c) Figure 8: Multimodal projection example illustrating the integration of heterogeneous anatomical data within a common VirtualRTG scene. Panel (a) shows several registered volumetric and surface-based objects positioned within the projection geometry, panel (b) shows the projection generated from the CBCT volume alone, and panel (c) shows the projection after adding surface-based multimodal data, illustrating how complementary models may enrich the projection-space representation. 

information obtained from surface-based imaging techniques. 

5.2.2. Region-of-interest selection (slab) and temporomandibular-joint visualisation 

The slab mechanism enables attenuation accumulation to be restricted to a selected spatial interval without modifying the underlying anatomical model. As a result, pro-jection formation may be focused on specific anatomical regions while suppressing struc-tures located outside the selected depth range. Figure 9 demonstrates this concept for visualisation of the temporomandibular joints. By reducing the active projection thickness from a broad anatomical region to a narrow slab, it becomes possible to isolate selected joint structures and improve the visibility of the articular space. Depending on anatomical asymmetry and object positioning, several slab positions may be required to obtain optimal visualisation of the left and right joints. More generally, the slab mechanism illustrates how prior knowledge of three-dimensional anatomy may be used to generate selective projection images that are not directly achiev-able in conventional radiography. For example, projection formation may be restricted to selected anatomical regions, including only one side of the craniofacial complex. Be-cause conventional radiographs represent a superposition of structures originating from different depths, selective projection may reduce ambiguities associated with overlapping anatomy and facilitate interpretation of specific regions of interest. Such projections should not be interpreted as replacements for standard radiographic examinations. Rather, they constitute an exploratory visualisation tool that enables analysis of relationships between three-dimensional anatomy and its projection-space representation. 24 (a) (b) (c) Figure 9: Depth-limited synthetic projections used for temporomandibular-joint visualisation. Panel (a) shows an axial projection generated from a broad 35 mm slab, while panels (b) and (c) show projections generated from narrower 5 mm slabs positioned to visualise the right and left temporomandibular joints, respectively. 

5.2.3. Projection of anatomical landmarks 

Anatomical landmarks constitute a fundamental component of cephalometric anal-ysis and have been extensively used in orthodontic diagnostics for several decades. Fig-ure 10 presents examples of landmark projection for different anatomical representa-tions. Landmarks defined on a three-dimensional facial surface model as well as land-marks associated with a skeletal surface reconstruction are propagated through the same transformation-aware scene and projected into image space together with their corre-sponding anatomical structures. The resulting VirtualRTG projections preserve the spatial relationships defined within the multimodal scene while enabling direct visuali-sation of anatomical annotations in projection space. Because landmarks participate in the same transformation hierarchy as anatomical objects, their projected positions remain consistent under changes of projection geometry and anatomical configuration. This enables direct correspondence between anatomical annotations and measurements defined in three-dimensional space and their projection-space representations. The presented example demonstrates that projection-space annotations may serve as a bridge between traditional two-dimensional cephalometric workflows and mod-ern three-dimensional anatomical analysis. Potential applications include validation of cephalometric measurements, comparison between 2D and 3D approaches, and genera-tion of annotated projection datasets for methodological studies. 25 (a) (b) (c)   

> (d) (e) (f)

Figure 10: Projection of anatomical landmarks associated with different anatomical representations. Panel (a) shows a three-dimensional facial surface model with visible landmarks, whereas panels (b) and (c) show the corresponding lateral cephalometric and posteroanterior projections. Panel (d) presents a skeletal surface reconstruction with anatomical landmarks, while panels (e) and (f) show the corre-sponding lateral cephalometric and posteroanterior projections. The example illustrates that annotations associated with different anatomical representations participate in the same transformation-aware scene and can be propagated consistently into projection space. 

26 5.2.4. Dynamic anatomical models and motion analysis 

Figure 11 presents an example in which anatomical motion is propagated directly into projection space through scene transformations. The example is based on multimodal anatomical data previously used in motion-analysis studies and illustrates four selected phases of mouth opening. In conventional radiography, observation of such motion would 

> Figure 11: Transformation-driven projection imaging of mandibular opening using depth-limited half-side projections. Columns show consecutive configurations selected from the recorded opening motion. The top row presents schematic three-dimensional views of the model and projection geometry, while the middle and bottom rows show slab-based synthetic projections generated separately for the left and right sides. Separate depth-limited projections reduce overlap of contralateral anatomical structures and improve visualisation of the temporomandibular-joint region during motion.

require repeated image acquisition at multiple jaw positions. In contrast, the proposed framework enables generation of comparable projection images from a single registered anatomical scene, allowing projection-space effects of mandibular motion to be explored under identical acquisition conditions. For each configuration, synthetic projections of the temporomandibular joints were generated under controlled geometric conditions. The projections were computed as depth-limited half-side views, with separate slab settings used for the left and right sides in order to reduce superposition of contralateral anatomical structures. To preserve com-27 parable magnification and viewing geometry, the anatomical model was rotated between left- and right-side projections, allowing both joints to be analysed under equivalent projection conditions. In the current implementation, projections are generated from surface reconstructions assigned a uniform attenuation coefficient. Consequently, image quality is influenced by the accuracy of the underlying triangular meshes. Geometric artefacts may arise from limited surface approximation accuracy as well as from mesh-topology defects. Despite these limitations, the resulting projections preserve sufficient information to visualise condylar displacement and changes in joint relationships during mandibular motion. From a methodological perspective, this example illustrates how anatomical motion can be propagated directly into projection space while preserving identical acquisition geometry and imaging assumptions. Consequently, multiple directly comparable pro-jection images may be generated from a shared anatomical reference scene. Future developments may further improve projection quality by separating movable and static anatomical components directly within volumetric data and performing motion simula-tion without intermediate surface reconstruction. 

5.3. Key methodological observations 

The conducted experiments support the four methodological assumptions underly-ing the proposed framework. First, the real-data scenarios demonstrate that hetero-geneous anatomical objects can be projected within a common transformation-aware scene without mandatory resampling into a single volume. Registered CBCT datasets, reconstructed surfaces, optical scans, landmarks, and auxiliary geometric objects may therefore remain represented as independent scene entities while contributing jointly to the resulting projection-space representation. Second, the synthetic benchmarks identify the dominant computational components of the current implementation. In volume-only scenarios, projection time is governed primarily by volumetric ray marching or voxel traversal. In mesh-based and hybrid sce-narios, ray–surface intersection becomes a major bottleneck, and the total cost increases with the number and complexity of objects participating in the projection process. Third, the comparison between Joseph-type sampling and Siddon traversal shows the expected trade-off between computational efficiency and step-size-independent voxel traversal. For the tested synthetic scenes, numerical differences between the two ap-proaches remained limited and were concentrated mainly near high-contrast boundaries. This indicates that sampling provides a practical backend for routine projection gener-ation, whereas Siddon may serve as a reference formulation when exact voxel traversal is required. The phase breakdown further indicates that scene-management overhead remains small. Ray initialisation, coordinate transformations, and bounding-volume preparation account for only a minor fraction of the total runtime, whereas more than 90% of the execution time is consistently spent in projection-specific computations, namely volumetric integration or ray–surface intersection processing. Fourth, the depth-limited and motion-related examples demonstrate that transformation-aware projection generation can be used to analyse selected anatomical relationships 28 under controlled conditions. Slab-based projections reduce structural superposition in temporomandibular-joint visualisation, while mandibular-motion examples show that multiple directly comparable VirtualRTG projections can be generated from a shared anatomical reference scene while preserving identical acquisition and presentation as-sumptions. Overall, the presented experiments indicate that the main value of the framework lies not in reproducing clinical radiographs with maximum physical realism, but in providing a controllable computational environment for studying relationships between anatomy, motion, multimodal data, and their projection-space representations. 

6. Discussion and framework limitations 

The proposed framework should be interpreted primarily as a methodological and computational environment for controlled experimentation rather than a fully physically faithful simulator of clinical radiographic acquisition. Its design prioritises explicit repre-sentation of anatomical transformations, controlled projection geometry, reproducibility of experimental conditions, and generation of multiple comparable synthetic projections from a shared anatomical scene. From this perspective, several modelling decisions adopted in the present work should be interpreted as deliberate modelling compromises rather than missing components. The framework prioritises controllability, interpretability, architectural flexibility, and compatibility with transformation-driven anatomical modelling over maximal physical realism. The framework assumes that all anatomical objects participating in projection for-mation are already represented within a common spatial reference frame. Registration, segmentation, and surface reconstruction are therefore treated as external preprocessing steps and are not the focus of the present work. Errors introduced during these steps, including residual registration inaccuracies, segmentation errors, or mesh-reconstruction artefacts, propagate directly to the generated projections and may affect their anatomical interpretation. The reported performance figures correspond to a CPU-based Python implemen-tation and should therefore be interpreted as representative of the proposed framework rather than of the underlying projection algorithms themselves. The present work focuses on scene representation, transformation management, and projection reproducibility. Hardware-specific acceleration, including GPU-based implementations, remains outside the current scope and constitutes a straightforward direction for future development. An important advantage of the proposed formulation is that it enables investigation of hypothetical or therapy-related anatomical configurations that may not be directly available through clinical imaging. Examples include mandibular repositioning, splint-assisted treatment scenarios, or controlled kinematic studies of TMJ-related motion. In such scenarios, repeated acquisition of radiographic images at multiple anatom-ical configurations would be impractical, difficult to standardise, or associated with additional patient radiation exposure. By deriving multiple projection images from a 29 common anatomical reference scene, the proposed framework enables systematic explo-ration of projection-space consequences of anatomical transformations while preserving identical acquisition geometry and imaging assumptions. 

6.1. Scope of radiographic interpretation 

The generated projections should be interpreted as controlled synthetic observa-tions of explicitly represented anatomical scenes rather than as diagnostically equivalent substitutes for clinical radiographs. The present implementation intentionally uses sim-plified attenuation and detector models and does not account for polychromatic spec-tra, photon scattering, focal-spot effects, detector-specific response, or quantum noise. Moreover, CBCT voxel values are not universally calibrated attenuation coefficients and may depend on scanner type, acquisition protocol, reconstruction settings, and arte-facts. Consequently, the proposed framework is intended for methodological experi-mentation, analysis of anatomy–projection relationships, and generation of comparable transformation-dependent scenarios, rather than for direct clinical diagnosis or quanti-tative radiographic dose/contrast prediction. The following subsections discuss these limitations in more detail, focusing on physi-cal realism, input-data assumptions, computational performance, and future extensions of the framework. 

6.2. Physical simplifications and input-data limitations 

The physical simplifications outlined above have direct consequences for the inter-pretation of the generated projections. The resulting images preserve selected geometric and attenuation-related properties under controlled assumptions, but should not be in-terpreted as physically faithful replicas of clinical radiographs. An important limitation arises from the underlying CT/CBCT data themselves. Although CT intensities may approximately relate to attenuation properties through Hounsfield units (HU), scanner-specific reconstruction procedures, acquisition settings, and preprocessing limit direct comparability across datasets. The problem is more pro-nounced in CBCT, where scalar values are not universally calibrated and may vary substantially between devices, acquisition protocols, and reconstruction pipelines. Con-sequently, the framework should not be interpreted as a tool for quantitative estimation of physical attenuation from CBCT values. Instead, it provides a configurable envi-ronment for investigating how alternative material-interpretation assumptions influence projection-space representations. As a consequence, uncertainty present in volumetric input data propagates to material-response modelling and final image formation. For this reason, the framework intention-ally avoids assuming a single fixed interpretation of voxel intensities. Instead, preprocess-ing, material interpretation, attenuation weighting, and presentation remain explicitly separated and configurable, allowing alternative modelling assumptions to be explored without modifying the remainder of the acquisition pipeline. 30 6.3. Geometric and computational trade-offs 

The projection engine primarily relies on ray marching with interpolated sampling rather than exact voxel-intersection schemes. This choice reflects a trade-off between geometric exactness, computational cost, and compatibility with independently trans-formable anatomical objects embedded within a hierarchical scene graph. Unlike reconstruction-oriented voxel traversal methods, the adopted approach nat-urally supports dynamically transformed objects, heterogeneous anatomical represen-tations, and projection of multiple independently positioned volumes without prior re-sampling into a common voxel grid. At the same time, numerical accuracy depends on ray-sampling density and interpolation strategy. Larger sampling steps reduce compu-tational cost but may reduce sensitivity to fine anatomical detail. The approximate computational complexity may be expressed as: 

T ∼ H · W · L

∆s · Nv,

where H · W denotes detector resolution, L the average ray length, and Nv the number of active volumetric sources. The framework therefore exposes configurable quality profiles controlling sampling density and detector resolution, enabling practical compromises between execution time and image quality during exploratory and comparative experiments. An additional limitation concerns modalities involving dynamically changing acqui-sition geometry. While cephalometric and cone-beam-inspired projections fit naturally within a fixed scene geometry, modalities such as panoramic imaging require moving acquisition trajectories and image-composition logic extending beyond a single static projection model. 

6.4. Methodological implications and future directions 

The methodological value of the framework stems primarily from its transformation-driven formulation and controlled observability rather than maximal physical realism. In the proposed approach, anatomical transformations constitute explicit entities within the scene representation and are propagated directly into projection space. Consequently, the framework enables systematic investigation of how anatomically defined transfor-mations manifest in projection images without requiring repeated image acquisition for every analysed configuration. Because anatomical transformations, projection geometry, material interpretation, and presentation remain explicitly parameterised, projection changes may be analysed under fully reproducible conditions. This creates a controlled experimental environment for studying projection-space consequences of anatomical motion, therapeutic reposi-tioning, and other transformation-driven scenarios. A particularly important application concerns anatomical structures whose behaviour changes over time, such as the temporomandibular joint (TMJ) during mandibular mo-tion. A shared anatomical reference scene may serve as a basis for multiple alterna-tive configurations, enabling directly comparable synthetic projections corresponding to 31 different motion phases or treatment-related positions without repeated radiographic exposure. Such a scene may be derived from a single CT/CBCT acquisition, from seg-mented volumetric components, or from multiple registered volumetric and surface-based datasets. Because anatomical transformations remain explicitly known, the framework may support generation of annotated projection datasets with reference motion information, facilitating validation of 2D–3D registration, motion tracking, geometry-sensitive image analysis, and machine-learning methods based on projection data. Beyond motion-related applications, the framework further supports heterogeneous multimodal scenes in which volumetric and surface-based anatomical representations coexist within a common transformation hierarchy. Consequently, CT/CBCT volumes, segmented structures, dental scans, splints, and auxiliary geometries may contribute jointly to image formation while preserving explicit spatial relationships. The framework additionally supports propagation of anatomical annotations from the three-dimensional scene into projection space. Since landmarks and paths remain embedded within the same transformation hierarchy as anatomical structures, their pro-jected positions remain geometrically consistent under anatomical motion and changing acquisition geometry. This may support cephalometric analysis, therapeutic planning, motion interpretation, and generation of annotated synthetic projection datasets. Future work may focus on extending physical realism, supporting more complex pro-jection geometries, and incorporating richer anatomical motion models, including non-rigid deformation and biomechanical constraints. Nevertheless, the central modelling idea remains unchanged: explicit and reproducible propagation of anatomical transfor-mations into projection-space representations. 

7. Conclusions 

This work introduced a transformation-driven framework for synthetic projection imaging in which independently transformable anatomical structures embedded in a scene graph give rise to comparable projection-space representations. Rather than treat-ing projection generation as an isolated rendering task, the proposed approach formulates synthetic radiographic imaging as a downstream consequence of explicitly represented anatomy, spatial transformations, projection geometry, material-response modelling, and presentation. A central contribution of the framework lies in linking multimodal anatomical repre-sentations with a projection-space observation layer. Anatomical configurations originat-ing from registration, treatment planning, therapeutic positioning, or motion modelling may be propagated directly to synthetic projection images while preserving explicit con-trol over acquisition assumptions and scene geometry. The proposed environment naturally supports transformation-driven anatomical sce-narios, particularly those involving mandibular motion and therapeutic configurations. A shared anatomical reference scene may serve as a basis for multiple alternative spa-tial configurations, enabling generation of directly comparable VirtualRTG projections 32 without repeated radiographic acquisition. Depending on the application, this scene may originate from a single CT/CBCT acquisition, segmented volumetric components, or multiple registered volumetric and surface-based datasets. Beyond conventional volume-only simulation, the framework supports multimodal projection scenarios in which volumetric and surface-based anatomical objects coexist within a common transformation hierarchy. Consequently, CT/CBCT data, segmented structures, dental scans, splints, and auxiliary geometries may jointly contribute to syn-thetic image formation while preserving explicit spatial relationships. The computational evaluation further demonstrated that the proposed scene-oriented formulation introduces only a minor management overhead. Across the analysed bench-mark scenarios, execution time was dominated by projection-specific operations, namely volumetric integration and ray–surface intersection processing, indicating that hierarchi-cal scene management remains compatible with practical projection generation. Rather than aiming at maximal physical realism, the proposed framework priori-tises controlled and reproducible exploration of anatomy–projection relationships under explicit modelling assumptions. Future work may focus on improving physical realism, extending projection geome-tries, incorporating richer anatomical motion models, and developing validation work-flows for motion analysis and synthetic projection datasets. 

CRediT authorship contribution statement 

• Dariusz Pojda : Conceptualization, Software, Investigation, Project administra-tion, Validation, Visualization, Writing — original draft, Writing — review & editing. 

• Krzysztof Domino : Supervision, Formal analysis, Validation, Writing — review & editing. 

• Michał Tarnawski : Data curation, Resources, Validation, Writing — review & editing. 

• Agnieszka Anna Tomaka : Conceptualization, Data curation, Formal analy-sis, Investigation, Methodology, Resources, Validation, Writing — original draft, Writing — review & editing. 

Code and data availability 

The source code and scripts required to reproduce the synthetic benchmark experi-ments are available at https://github.com/iitis/virtRTG.git . The projection func-tionality described in this work is implemented as the virtRTG research module for the 

pyDpVision environment. pyDpVision (https://github.com/pojdulos/pyDpVision. git ) is a Python-based experimental environment derived from the previously published 

dpVision platform [1] and is used here primarily to provide scene hierarchy, object transformation, and projection-workflow management. The released code is intended to 33 support reproducibility of the computational experiments reported in this manuscript, rather than to provide a complete end-user application or a full replacement for the original C++ dpVision software. The real-data demonstration workflow depends on anonymised medical datasets and local preprocessing steps. These datasets cannot be publicly redistributed due to privacy and ethical restrictions. 

Declaration of generative AI use 

During the preparation of this manuscript, the authors used generative artificial intelligence tools to assist with language editing, text refinement, and improvement of readability. All scientific content, methodology, software implementation, experimental design, analysis, interpretation of results, and final editorial decisions were developed and verified by the authors. The authors take full responsibility for the content of this publication. 

References 

[1] D. Pojda, M. Żarski, A. A. Tomaka, L. Luchowski, dpVision: Environment for multimodal images, SoftwareX 30 (2025) 102093. doi:10.1016/j.softx.2025. 102093 .[2] A. A. Tomaka, D. Pojda, M. Tarnawski, L. Luchowski, Transformation trees — doc-umentation of multimodal image registration, Computers in Biology and Medicine 193 (2025) 110311. doi:10.1016/j.compbiomed.2025.110311 .[3] J. H. Lambert, Photometria sive de mensura et gradibus luminis, colorum et umbrae (1760). [4] J. T. Bushberg, et al., The Essential Physics of Medical Imaging, 3rd Edition, Lippincott Williams & Wilkins, 2012. [5] R. L. Siddon, Fast calculation of the exact radiological path for a three-dimensional ct array, Medical Physics 12 (2) (1985) 252–255. doi:10.1118/1.595715 .[6] F. Jacobs, E. Sundermann, B. D. Sutter, M. Christiaens, I. Lemahieu, A fast al-gorithm to calculate the exact radiological path through a pixel or voxel space, Journal of Computing and Information Technology 6 (1) (1998) 89–94. URL https://hrcak.srce.hr/150245 

[7] P. M. Joseph, An improved algorithm for reprojecting rays through pixel images, IEEE Transactions on Medical Imaging 1 (3) (1982) 192–196. doi:10.1109/TMI. 1982.4307610 .[8] L. Zöllei, 2d-3d rigid-body registration of x-ray fluoroscopy and ct images, Master’s thesis, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, MA, USA (Aug. 2001). URL https://people.csail.mit.edu/lzollei/research/papers/ms_thesis. pdf 

34 [9] L. Westover, Footprint evaluation for volume rendering, Computer Graphics 24 (4) (1990) 367–376. doi:10.1145/97880.97901 .[10] B. D. Man, S. Basu, Distance-driven projection and backprojection in three di-mensions, Physics in Medicine and Biology 49 (11) (2004) 2463–2475. doi: 10.1088/0031-9155/49/11/024 .[11] S. Agostinelli, et al., Geant4—a simulation toolkit, Nuclear Instruments and Methods in Physics Research Section A 506 (3) (2003) 250–303. doi:10.1016/ S0168-9002(03)01368-8 .[12] A. Peterzol, J. Berthier, P. Duvauchelle, C. Ferrero, D. Babot, X-ray phase contrast image simulation, Nuclear Instruments and Methods in Physics Research Section B: Beam Interactions with Materials and Atoms 254 (2) (2007) 307–318. doi: 10.1016/j.nimb.2006.11.042 .[13] L. Zöllei, E. Grimson, W. M. W. III, 2d-3d rigid registration of x-ray fluoroscopy and ct images using mutual information and sparsely sampled histogram estimator, in: Medical Image Computing and Computer-Assisted Intervention – MICCAI 2001, Vol. 2208 of Lecture Notes in Computer Science, Springer, Berlin, Heidelberg, 2001, pp. 696–703. doi:10.1007/3-540-45468-3_83 .[14] A. Hurvitz, L. Joskowicz, Registration of a ct-like atlas to fluoroscopic x-ray im-ages using intensity correspondences, International Journal of Computer Assisted Radiology and Surgery 3 (6) (2008) 493–504. doi:10.1007/s11548-008-0264-z .[15] R. R. Galigekere, K.-L. Ma, D. A. Bullitt, Scaled attenuation fields: Improved real-time generation method for digitally reconstructed radiographs, in: IEEE Vi-sualization 2003 (VIS 2003), IEEE, 2003, pp. 299–306. doi:10.1109/VISUAL.2003. 1250384 .[16] T. K. Papakosta, A. D. Savva, T. L. Economopoulos, G. K. Matsopoulos, H. G. Gröhndal, An automatic panoramic image reconstruction scheme from dental com-puted tomography images, Dentomaxillofacial Radiology 46 (4) (2017) 20160225. 

doi:10.1259/dmfr.20160225 .[17] Z. Yun, S. Yang, E. Huang, L. Zhao, W. Yang, Q. Feng, Automatic reconstruc-tion method for high-contrast panoramic image from dental cone-beam ct data, Computer Methods and Programs in Biomedicine 175 (2019) 205–214. doi:https: //doi.org/10.1016/j.cmpb.2019.04.024 .[18] J. Zhang, Y. Jiang, F. Gao, S. Zhao, F. Yang, L. Song, A fast automatic recon-struction method for panoramic images based on cone beam computed tomography, Electronics 11 (15) (2022). doi:10.3390/electronics11152404 .[19] S. Lee, S. Woo, C. Lee, J. Lee, J. Seo, Fully-automatic synthesizing method of dental panoramic radiograph by using internal curve of mandible in dental volumetric CT, 35 in: C. A. Bouman, G. T. Buzzard, R. L. Stevenson (Eds.), Computational Imaging XVII, Burlingame, California, USA, 13-17 January 2019, Society for Imaging Sci-ence and Technology, 2019. doi:10.2352/ISSN.2470-1173.2019.13.COIMG-148 .[20] P. M. Cattaneo, C. B. Bloch, D. Calmar, M. Hjortshøj, B. Melsen, Comparison be-tween conventional and cone-beam computed tomography-generated cephalograms, American Journal of Orthodontics and Dentofacial Orthopedics 134 (6) (2008) 798– 802. doi:10.1016/j.ajodo.2008.07.008 .[21] S.-J. Kim, S.-B. Park, Y.-I. Kim, B.-H. Cho, D.-S. Hwang, The reliability of cone-beam computed tomography (cbct)-generated frontal cephalograms, Journal of Cranio-Maxillofacial Surgery 40 (8) (2012) e331–e336. doi:10.1016/j.jcms. 2012.01.016 .[22] C. Li, H. Teixeira, N. Tanna, Z. Zheng, S. H. Y. Chen, M. Zou, C.-H. Chung, The reliability of two- and three-dimensional cephalometric measurements: A cbct study, Diagnostics 11 (12) (2021). doi:10.3390/diagnostics11122292 .[23] R. B. Seah, W. K. Mak, K. Bryant, M. Korlaet, A. Dwyer, G. I. Bain, Four-dimensional computed tomography scan for dynamic elbow disorders: recom-mendations for clinical utility, JSES International 6 (1) (2022) 182–186. doi: 10.1016/j.jseint.2021.09.013 .[24] V. Gopalakrishnan, P. Golland, Fast auto-differentiable digitally reconstructed ra-diographs for solving inverse problems in intraoperative imaging, arXiv preprint arXiv:2208.12737 (2022). doi:10.48550/arXiv.2208.12737 .[25] G. C. Sharp, R. Li, J. Wolfgang, G. T. Y. Chen, M. Peroni, M. F. Spadea, S. Mori, J. Zhang, J. Shackleford, N. Kandasamy, Plastimatch: An Open Source Software Suite for Radiotherapy Image Processing, in: Proceedings of the XVIth Interna-tional Conference on the Use of Computers in Radiation Therapy (ICCR), Amster-dam, The Netherlands, 2010, pp. 1–4. [26] S. Rit, M. Vila Oliva, S. Brousmiche, R. Labarbe, D. Sarrut, G. C. Sharp, The Reconstruction Toolkit (RTK), an open-source cone-beam CT reconstruction toolkit based on the Insight Toolkit (ITK), Journal of Physics: Conference Series 489 (1) (2014) 012079. doi:10.1088/1742-6596/489/1/012079 .[27] A. Biguri, M. Dosanjh, S. Hancock, M. Soleimani, TIGRE: a MATLAB-GPU tool-box for CBCT image reconstruction, Biomedical Physics & Engineering Express 2 (5) (2016) 055010. doi:10.1088/2057-1976/2/5/055010 .[28] M. Unberath, J.-N. Zaech, S. C. Lee, B. Bier, J. Fotouhi, M. Armand, N. Navab, DeepDRR – A Catalyst for Machine Learning in Fluoroscopy-guided Procedures (2018). arXiv:1803.08606 , doi:10.48550/arXiv.1803.08606 .36