Title: VectorSmuggle: Steganographic Exfiltration in Embedding Stores and a Cryptographic Provenance Defense

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2605.13764v1

Published Time: Thu, 14 May 2026 01:37:33 GMT

Number of Pages: 47

Markdown Content:
# VectorSmuggle: Steganographic Exfiltration in Embedding Stores and a Cryptographic Provenance Defense 

## Jascha Wanger ThirdKey / Tarnover, LLC 

## jascha@thirdkey.ai 

## 6 May 2026 Zenodo preprint: 10.5281/zenodo.20058256 

Abstract 

Modern retrieval-augmented generation (RAG) systems convert sensitive content into high-dimensional embeddings and store them in vector databases that treat the resulting numerical artifacts as opaque. Major vector-store products do not appear to provide native or default controls for embedding integrity, ingestion-time distributional anomaly detection, or cryptographic provenance attestation. We show that this opens a class of steganographic exfiltration attacks: an attacker with write access to the ingestion pipeline can hide payload data inside embeddings using simple post-embedding perturbations (noise injection, rotation, scaling, offset, fragmentation, and combinations thereof) while preserving the surface-level retrieval behavior the RAG system exposes to legitimate users. We evaluate these techniques across a synthetic-PII corpus on text-embedding-3-large ,four locally hosted open embedding models, a cross-corpus replication on BEIR NFCorpus and a Quora subset (over 26,000 chunks combined), seven vector-store configurations, an adaptive-attacker variant of the detector evaluation, and a paraphrased-query retrieval benchmark. Distribution-shifting perturbations are often caught by simple anomaly detectors; small-angle orthogonal rotation defeats distribution-based detection across every (model, corpus) pair tested. A disjoint-Givens rotation encoder gives a closed-form per-vector capacity ceiling of ⌊d/ 2⌋ · b bits, but real embedding manifolds impose a capacity-detectability trade-off at higher payloads, and the retrieval-preserving operating point sits well below the ceiling. Cross-backend, quantization, retrieval, and adaptive-evasion results together show that statistical detection is useful as a first filter but not a load-bearing integrity control. Detailed results are in Section 5. We further propose VectorPin , a cryptographic provenance protocol that pins each em-bedding to its source content and producing model via an Ed25519 signature over a canonical byte representation. Any post-embedding modification — including all studied techniques, both perturbation and architectural-smuggling variants — breaks signature verification. We provide open-source reference implementations in Python and Rust, locked together by cross-language test vectors that guarantee bit-for-bit compatibility. The framing we propose for the security community: embedding-level integrity is a deployable, standardizable control that closes the demonstrated attack class — not a fundamental property of vector databases as built today. 

# 1 Introduction 

Enterprise deployments of large language models increasingly run on retrieval-augmented generation (RAG) [ 14 ]: documents are converted into dense embeddings via a model such as text-embedding-3-large [20 ], stored in a vector database (Qdrant, Pinecone, FAISS [ 9], pgvector, Chroma), and 1

> arXiv:2605.13764v1 [cs.CR] 13 May 2026

retrieved by similarity at query time. The substrate that holds those embeddings has become load-bearing: it intermediates access to financial records, medical notes, legal exhibits, and proprietary engineering content. Compromise of the vector store is now compromise of the underlying corpus. Yet vector databases were not designed with content integrity in mind. Their security models cover authentication and transport (TLS, RBAC, API keys, encryption at rest), but treat the embedding payload itself as an opaque numerical artifact. Major vector-store products do not appear to provide native or default controls for inspecting the statistical distribution of vectors during ingestion, verifying the provenance of stored embeddings on read, or maintaining a tamper-evident audit trail for post-ingestion modifications (see vendor capability survey, Table 1). The result is a wide attack surface that traditional Data Loss Prevention (DLP) tools cannot reach, because DLP scans documents and traffic, not the floating-point content of vectors. 

## 1.1 The gap, demonstrated 

This paper studies a specific class of attacks against that gap: steganographic exfiltration , in which an attacker with write access to the ingestion pipeline hides arbitrary data inside the embeddings being ingested. The hidden data is decoded later by an accomplice with read access to the vector store. We evaluate six families of techniques — additive Gaussian noise, orthogonal rotation, magnitude scaling, fixed offset, cross-model fragmentation, and sequential combinations — across multiple noise levels on a real embedding model. The attacks work against today’s production deployments in the narrow technical sense: they preserve cosine similarity, survive the default per-dimension int8 quantization that Qdrant and similar systems apply, and do not trip any native or default embedding-integrity control we found in surveyed vector-store products. But evaluating them honestly requires asking what a defender who has read the literature would do, not what current production deployments happen to deploy. 

## 1.2 The honest finding 

Our central empirical result has two parts. First, for the distribution-shifting techniques (noise, scaling, offset, and their combinations), the attacker’s stealth window in our corpus is narrow: two off-the-shelf statistical detectors — Isolation Forest [ 15 ] and One-Class SVM [ 26 ] with an RBF kernel — trained on a held-out clean batch flag every operating point that meaningfully moved the embedding direction ( cos (orig , obf ) < 0.95 ) at ROC-AUC ≥ 0.85 , with several configurations reaching 1.00 .Second, orthogonal rotation is the structural exception in the small-angle / few-rotation regime: it preserves pairwise inner products and per-dimension marginal distributions, and on every (model, corpus) pair we tested at the obfuscator’s library defaults the distribution-based detectors guess at chance — including the cross-corpus replication on BEIR NFCorpus and a Quora subset totalling over 26,000 chunks (Section 5.13). The rotation parameter sweep in Section 5.7 extends this to 35 operating points on a 300-vector synthetic-Gaussian baseline, and finds AUC ≤ 0.53 across all of them. At higher rotation capacity , however, the picture changes: the empirical payload-capacity demonstration in Section 5.8 shows that on real text-embedding-3-large corpus vectors, random-angle disjoint-Givens rotations at moderate K become detectable because the trained density model fits local manifold geometry rather than only population moments (OCSVM AUC ≈ 0.92 at 256 B, 

≥ 0.99 at 512 B). The result is a capacity-detectability trade-off, not a free lunch. We treat both halves of this finding as the contribution. The first half characterises a real gap in production deployments and shows that the obvious statistical-baseline defense closes most of it. The second half identifies the residual — rotation in the small-angle / few-rotation regime, 2undetectable across all our (model, corpus, parameter) configurations, with a closed-form capacity ceiling at higher rotation that depends on data distribution to remain hidden — which is precisely the regime where a constructive provenance defense becomes the only durable option, because the durability of statistical detection at high capacity depends on assumptions about the defender’s training-set coverage that are hard to verify. 

## 1.3 The constructive defense: VectorPin 

The second half of the paper proposes a closeable defense. We design and implement VectorPin , a cryptographic provenance protocol that pins every embedding to its source content (by hash), its producing model (by identifier), and its issuer (by Ed25519 signing key). Verification is structured: a verifier with the public key can detect signature forgery, vector tampering, source mismatch, and model substitution as distinct outcomes. The protocol is deliberately minimal — one signature, one hash family, a fixed canonical byte form for floating-point arrays — so that implementations in different languages can be made bit-for-bit compatible and locked into agreement by shared test vectors. We provide reference implementations in Python and Rust [ 32 ], with cross-language test fixtures that gate every change to either implementation. A Rust port matters because Rust runtimes (e.g., agent-policy frameworks such as Symbiont [ 31 ]) are increasingly the boundary at which RAG-derived data is consumed, and they need in-process verification without polyglot sidecars. Against the attacks we evaluate in Section 5, VectorPin is structurally complete: every post-embedding modification, by design, breaks the vec_hash commitment in the signed header. We do not claim this is a benchmark result — it is a property of the protocol — but we do claim it is the right shape of defense for the threat model we articulate in Section 3. 

## 1.4 Contributions 

• A formal three-tier threat model for vector-store exfiltration that distinguishes insider with backup access , compromised database credentials , and query-only adversaries, and explicitly justifies which adversary the rest of the paper validates against (Section 3). 

• An empirical evaluation of six steganographic techniques spanning a 68-chunk synthetic-PII corpus on text-embedding-3-large , four locally hosted open embedding models (Nomic, Em-beddingGemma, Snowflake Arctic, MXBai), and a cross-corpus replication on BEIR NFCorpus (16,763 chunks, medical) and a 10,000-document Quora subset (web Q&A) — reporting fidelity, distributional detectability, quantization resilience, and end-to-end recovery per technique ×

operating point (Section 5). 

• A closed-form and empirical payload-capacity analysis for the rotation channel: a disjoint-Givens keyed-pair encoder with capacity ⌊d/ 2⌋ · b bits, a working encoder/decoder that round-trips arbitrary payloads at zero BER, and a capacity-vs-detectability characterisation that distinguishes the channel ceiling, the retrieval-preserving operating point, and the data-distribution-dependent AUC behaviour at high capacity (Section 5.8). 

• Concrete defensive baselines: ROC-AUC and TPR-at-fixed-FPR for Isolation Forest and One-Class SVM trained on a held-out clean batch, replacing prior work’s vague “DLP bypass rate” claims with numbers, plus an adaptive white-box evasion result that calibrates the durability of those baselines (Sections 5.3 and 5.11). 3• Cross-backend round-trip and quantization tests across FAISS-flat, FAISS-HNSW, FAISS IVF-PQ at two compression levels, Chroma, and Qdrant in two precisions — characterising whether the bit channel survives a deployed vector store (Section 5.9). 

• The VectorPin protocol: a minimal cryptographic provenance scheme for embedding integrity, with a wire-format specification detailed enough to support cross-language reimplementation (Section 6, Section A). 

• Open-source reference implementations in Python and Rust with cross-language test vectors enforcing bit-for-bit compatibility in CI [32]. 

## 1.5 What this paper does not claim 

The cleanest way to keep a security-research preprint defensible is to mark its non-claims explicitly: 

• No novel attack primitive. Steganography in floating-point data is a well-studied space. Our contribution is not the perturbations themselves but the threat model in which they apply, the empirical detectability evaluation, and the constructive defense. 

• No novel cryptographic primitive. VectorPin uses vanilla Ed25519 over SHA-256. The contribution is the canonical byte form for embeddings, the wire-format design, and the cross-language compatibility discipline — not new cryptography. 

• No claim of universal attack effectiveness. The techniques studied work under threat-model A (insider with backup access). Threat-model C (query-only) is fundamentally lower-bandwidth and is not validated by our results. 

• No claim of unbreakable defense. VectorPin protects against post-ingestion modification, given a trusted ingestion path and signing-key custody. An attacker with the private key, or one who attests a malicious vector at ingestion time, defeats it. Section 6.5 states the limits explicitly. 

• No claim of standardization. We propose a wire format and publish reference implementations. Adoption as a standard is future work for a body such as IETF or ISO if the community decides the design merits one. The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 reviews embedding-store architecture and related provenance primitives. Section 3 formalizes the three-tier adversary model and justifies the focus on the insider-backup case. Section 4 catalogs the six steganographic techniques. Section 5 reports the empirical study. Section 6 presents the VectorPin protocol and its coverage relative to the studied attacks. Section 7 addresses why production vector databases ship no defenses today and what would need to change. Sections 8 to 10 close the paper. Section A reproduces the protocol specification self-contained for cross-language reimplementation. 

# 2 Background 

This section reviews the three components needed to read the rest of the paper: how production vector stores work, what is known about steganography in continuous-valued data, and what cryptographic provenance frameworks exist for adjacent artifact classes. Readers familiar with any of these can skip the corresponding subsection. 42.1 Embeddings and vector databases 

A modern retrieval-augmented generation (RAG) pipeline [ 14 ] has three stages. Ingestion runs source documents through a chunker and an embedding model (e.g., OpenAI text-embedding-3-large [ 20 ] at 3072 dimensions, Cohere embed-english-v3.0 at 1024 dimensions, or a local model in the BGE/Nomic families) to produce dense floating-point vectors [ 12 ]. Storage writes those vectors, along with the source text and arbitrary metadata, to a vector database. Retrieval embeds an incoming user query and returns the top-k nearest stored vectors by cosine similarity or dot product (often via approximate-nearest-neighbor indexes such as HNSW [ 16 ] or product quantization [ 9 ]), which a downstream LLM consumes as context. Production vector databases fall into two categories. The purpose-built category — Qdrant, Pinecone, Weaviate, Milvus, Chroma — exposes a similarity-search API over collections of vectors plus payload metadata. The retrofit category — pgvector for PostgreSQL, the FAISS library embedded in an application, vector indexes in OpenSearch or Elasticsearch — adds vector operations to an existing data store. The two categories share a common security model: authentication and authorization on the API, TLS in transit, encryption at rest, and audit logs of who-queried-what. None of the major systems we surveyed inspects the statistical distribution of vectors during ingestion or verifies the provenance of stored embeddings on read. This is not an oversight; it is a deliberate design posture. Vector databases were optimized for capacity, latency, and price during a period when their consumers were search and recommendation systems where the embeddings were public-facing artifacts. The recent re-purposing as a substrate for confidential RAG has happened faster than the security model has been re-examined — a pattern that has played out before with DNS, with HTTP/3 covert channels, and with default-public S3 buckets. A related implementation detail bears on the empirical evaluation: all major vector stores apply some form of quantization to reduce memory and disk footprint. The default in Qdrant [ 24 ] is per-dimension scalar int8 quantization, which preserves direction because every vector shares the same per-dimension scale. FAISS [ 9 ] offers more aggressive options including product quantization and binary embeddings; these are far more lossy but are not the default for general-purpose collections. We model the per-dimension int8 case explicitly in Section 5.4. 

Vendor capability survey. Table 1 summarizes integrity-relevant capabilities of the major production vector stores as of the time of writing. The column we care about most — “vector integrity check” — is empty across the board: no surveyed system inspects the floating-point content of stored vectors, verifies provenance on read, or maintains a tamper-evident audit trail for post-ingestion modifications. This is the gap the paper studies. 

## 2.2 Steganography in continuous-valued data 

Steganography in floating-point arrays is a small but mature area [ 23 , 7]. The dominant techniques fall into three families. Least-significant-bit schemes [ 34 ] embed payload bits in the mantissa of each float, exploiting the gap between the representational precision of IEEE-754 and the perceptual precision of downstream consumers. Spread-spectrum schemes [ 5 ] distribute payload across a larger number of dimensions at lower amplitude, trading capacity for evasion of per-dimension statistical detectors. Transform-domain schemes apply a frequency or projection transform first and embed in the transformed coefficients, the analogue of DCT-domain image steganography. The literature originates in image and audio carriers, where the threat model is well-defined: the cover signal is consumed by a human or by a perceptual quality metric, and the steganographic goal 5Table 1: Integrity-relevant capabilities of major production vector stores (as of writing). Auth/R-BAC, TLS, and access-level audit logs are well-covered; vector-content integrity, ingestion-time distributional anomaly detection, and cryptographic provenance attestation are uniformly absent. Sources: vendor documentation; “partial” indicates the capability exists but is not on by default. The empty middle three columns are the gap this paper studies. This survey tracks native/default product controls, not custom anomaly checks or integrity layers an operator may build around the database.                                                

> System Auth/RBAC TLS Access audit Vector in-tegrity check Ingestion anomaly detection Provenance attestation Qdrant yes yes partial no no no Pinecone yes yes yes no no no Weaviate yes yes yes no no no Milvus yes yes partial no no no Chroma yes yes no no no no pgvector inherited inherited inherited no no no FAISS (lib) n/a n/a n/a no no no

is to remain below the perceptual or detection threshold. The threat model is genuinely different for embedding stores. The “cover” is no longer a perceptual artifact — it is a high-dimensional vector whose only consumer is a similarity-search operator. Detection thresholds are not perceptual; they are statistical and machine-learned. Capacity bounds in this regime are not driven by human just-noticeable-difference but by distributional anomaly detection. The empirical contribution in Section 5 is to measure where those statistical thresholds actually sit for current embedding models against current off-the-shelf detectors. The finding — that the operating window between “too small to hide anything” and “trivially detected” is narrow — is consistent with the broader literature on detecting steganography in high-dimensional continuous data, but had not previously been quantified for production embedding pipelines. 

## 2.3 Cryptographic provenance for data artifacts 

The defense in Section 6 is an application of a known design family to a new substrate. Four prior systems set the pattern: 

Software-artifact provenance. sigstore [ 18 ] pioneered the model of attaching a signature to a published software artifact, distributing public keys via short-lived certificates issued by a transparency-logged identity oracle. The defining property is that any artifact reaching a consumer carries enough metadata to verify it without out-of-band trust establishment. 

Supply-chain attestations. in-toto [ 28 ] extended the sigstore-shaped model to multi-step pipelines, attaching attestations to each pipeline step so the consumer can verify not only the final artifact but the sequence of transformations that produced it. SLSA (Supply-chain Levels for Software Artifacts) [19] provides a layered taxonomy of guarantees within this design. 

Media provenance. The Coalition for Content Provenance and Authenticity [ 4] applies the same family of ideas to images, video, and audio, binding a content artifact to its capture device, editing history, and identity claims via a chain of cryptographic manifests. 6Table 2: Adversary capability matrix. Threat model A is the focus of this paper’s empirical results. B is supplementary. C is explicitly out of scope.                      

> Capability A: Insider Backup B: Compromised DB Creds C: Query-Only Read source documents ×××
> Write to ingestion pipeline ✓××
> Read raw vectors ✓✓×
> Issue similarity queries ✓✓✓
> DLP scans source documents ✓n/a n/a DLP scans vector store ×××

Tool-schema provenance. SchemaPin [ 30 ] — a sister project from the authors — applies signed-payload provenance to JSON schemas for tool calls in Model Context Protocol (MCP) deployments, so that an MCP client can verify a tool’s schema before invocation. VectorPin fills the corresponding gap at the embedding layer. The wire format is simpler than any of the four prior systems above because the artifact being attested — a pinned embedding plus its source text reference — is much smaller and has a fixed structure. The contribution is the canonical byte form for floating-point arrays, the cross-language test-vector discipline, and the application of this design family to a substrate that currently has no provenance story at all. We discuss the positioning in more detail in Section 8. 

# 3 Threat Model 

The strongest reviewer objection to a paper of this shape is the question: if the attacker can read the raw vectors, why bother with steganography? Why not exfiltrate the source corpus directly? 

Taking that question seriously is the difference between an empirically defensible paper and one that overclaims. We answer it by separating three adversary tiers explicitly, naming which tier each empirical result actually supports, and naming the tier we leave out of scope. 

## 3.1 Three adversary tiers 

Threat model A: Insider with backup access (primary). A privileged engineer in an organization that uses RAG for internal knowledge retrieval. The engineer can ingest documents into the pipeline (the legitimate authoring path) and has read access to vector-store backups — a reasonable approximation of an SRE, ML platform engineer, or anyone with the credentials needed to operate the production system. The engineer cannot exfiltrate raw documents because those pass through a DLP product, are watermarked, or are stored in a data room the engineer does not have direct access to. The engineer’s goal is to smuggle sensitive source content out via the vector backup. They write metadata into the embedding pipeline at ingestion time and use that metadata to invert the obfuscation once the backup is exfiltrated. All capacity, fidelity, and detection metrics in Section 5 are reported under this model. 

Threat model B: Compromised vector-DB credentials (secondary). An external attacker who has stolen vector-database credentials — e.g., an exposed API key, a leaked service principal — but does not have access to the source documents because those have been deleted, stored elsewhere, or encrypted at rest with keys the attacker does not hold. The attacker cannot write to the ingestion pipeline; they can only read existing vectors and issue queries. 7This model is weaker than A in attack surface (no opportunity to plant attestation metadata at ingestion) but is real, because disclosure of vector-DB credentials does happen. We discuss it in Section 7 but do not produce empirical numbers under it. 

Threat model C: Query-only (out of scope). An attacker with similarity-search query access only — no ability to read raw vectors. Any payload recovery happens through rank-information channels, which are bandwidth-limited relative to direct vector access by orders of magnitude. We mention this model for completeness but explicitly do not validate the techniques in Section 4 against it. 

## 3.2 Why steganography rather than direct dump? 

Under threat model A, a defender will reasonably ask why the insider does not just qdrant export 

the entire collection. Three reasons make steganography preferable to direct extraction: 

Egress shaping. A direct dump is a single large transfer that trips standard egress monitoring (volume thresholds, rare-destination heuristics, sudden burst from a service account). Steganographic payloads piggyback on routine query and write traffic that is already on the wire and already classified as benign. 

Targeted recovery. The insider often wants specific high-value documents (a particular financial report, a specific patient file), not the corpus. Steganographic markers let the attacker pinpoint the right vectors without first downloading gigabytes and then sifting through them. 

Plausible deniability. A vector store full of innocuous-looking embeddings reads as “business as usual” to a forensic investigation. A direct dump leaves an unambiguous fingerprint: a service account that read every vector in a collection in a span the attacker chose. The latter is far easier for an incident-response team to triage. These reasons are not unique to vector stores — the same arguments apply to DNS exfiltration, HTTPS-layer covert channels, and steganography in image attachments. We restate them here only because the reviewer-question rate on this paper category demands it. 

## 3.3 What VectorPin assumes about the adversary 

The defense in Section 6 is designed against an adversary who can: 

• Modify vectors after they are produced (via a poisoned ingestion pipeline, a compromised vector DB, or backup-level access). 

• Observe the public verification key, but not the private signing key. 

• Replay or selectively delete pin attestations. It does not defend against: 

• An attacker with the private signing key. Key custody is the user’s responsibility. 

• An attacker who modifies source documents before embedding. Upstream content integrity controls remain necessary. 8Table 3: Steganographic techniques studied, grouped by architectural family. The recovery metadata 

column lists what the attacker must store at ingestion time to invert the transformation later; this metadata is what VectorPin’s signed attestation prevents the attacker from substituting. The 

payload-bit proxy column is an upper bound on encodable channel size per vector at typical operating parameters. “low” means under 100 bits, “medium” 100-1000, “high” over 1000.                          

> Family Technique Recovery metadata Invertible? Payload bits Perturbation Noise injection {ni}(samples or seed) w/ samples or seed high Rotation R(matrix or seed) exact medium-high Scaling {si}exact low Offset oexact low (single channel) Combined all of the above w/ all high Architectural Fragmentation dimension partition, model ids exact, w/ map medium (in partitioning)

• An attacker who uses a legitimate signing key to attest a malicious vector at ingestion time. Upstream input validation remains necessary. We restate these limits in Section 6.5 after introducing the protocol so the reader can match each non-claim to the relevant verification step. 

# 4 Steganographic Techniques 

We separate the techniques into two architecturally distinct families. Perturbation attacks (Section 4.1 through Section 4.6) operate on a single embedding v ∈ Rd produced by a model M and produce a perturbed embedding v′ ∈ Rd that an attacker writes to the vector store in place of v; the hidden payload is encoded in the difference v′ − v. Architectural smuggling attacks (Section 4.5) do not modify a clean embedding at all — they exploit the architectural choice of which embedding model produces which fragment of the source content. Only the first family is statistically detectable in principle; the second requires architectural defenses (model attestation) rather than distributional ones. The empirical evaluation in Section 5 reports detector AUCs only for the perturbation family; fragmentation is addressed by the model field of the VectorPin attestation rather than by statistical detection. Table 3 summarizes the families, their parameters, recovery-metadata requirements, and a payload-bit proxy that gives an upper bound on the encodable channel size per vector. The proxy is not a Shannon-capacity proof; it is an operational bound on how much an attacker could in principle hide given the parameter freedom each technique offers. 

## 4.1 Noise injection 

The simplest technique. For each embedding, sample n ∼ N (0 , σ 2Id) and emit v′ = v + n. The attacker stores {ni} as recovery metadata so that, given the obfuscated batch, they can recover 

vi = v′ 

> i

− ni. The hidden payload is encoded in the noise samples themselves — e.g., the bit string b

is mapped to a deterministic pseudorandom n(b) so the recipient who knows b (or the seed that produced it) can re-derive the noise and decode. The capacity-detectability trade is controlled by σ. For a unit-norm embedding, σ acts as a per-dimension amplitude budget: small σ preserves cosine similarity but is hard to encode meaningful 9payload into; large σ moves the embedding off the unit sphere and shows up as a distributional shift visible to per-dimension variance tests. We measure three values ( σ ∈ { 0.005 , 0.01 , 0.05 }) plus the obfuscator’s library default in Section 5.2, where the operating point at σ = 0 .005 preserves 

cos = 0 .964 but is already detectable by One-Class SVM at AUC 0.796 .

## 4.2 Rotation 

For R ∈ O(d) (an orthogonal matrix), v′ = Rv leaves the magnitude ∥v′∥ = ∥v∥ and the pairwise inner products ⟨Ru, Rv ⟩ = ⟨u, v ⟩ unchanged. Cosine similarity is therefore invariant under any consistent rotation applied to all stored vectors and queries — which is the hardest case for a defender, because no per-vector statistic distinguishes the obfuscated batch from a clean one as long as the same R is applied uniformly. In our implementation R is constructed by composing several random Givens rotations of bounded angle: 

R = ∏

> (i,j,θ )∈Π

Gi,j (θ), θ ∈ [−θmax , +θmax ]

The hidden payload is encoded in the choice of (i, j, θ ) tuples; the attacker stores R (or the seed that generated it) as recovery metadata. Larger θmax and larger |Π| move the rotated vector farther from its original (we measure cosine drops to 0.68 at θmax = π/ 2, |Π| = 200 — Section 5.7), but the rotated batch remains distributionally indistinguishable to the detectors we evaluate because the transformation is orthogonal. The limiting factors on the attacker’s parameter choice are therefore retrieval compatibility, payload encoding efficiency, and whether a downstream verifier checks against the original vector — not anomaly-detection visibility. 

## 4.3 Scaling 

Per-vector magnitude rescaling: v′ 

> i

= si · vi for scalars si. Direction is preserved (so cosine similarity to other unscaled vectors changes only as cos θ where θ is the rescaling-induced angle, which is zero), but norm-based detectors see the per-vector scale shift directly. The attacker stores {si} as recovery metadata. In practice this technique is mostly useful when combined with others: alone, it produces no information channel except through the choice of si values, which are visible in ∥v′

> i

∥/∥vi∥ if the defender ever sees both. Our evaluation reports it as a control — AUC is essentially random at the library default (Table 5) because the default scale shift is too small to register against the intrinsic norm variance of the corpus. 

## 4.4 Offset 

A constant additive shift: v′ = v + o for a fixed o ∈ Rd. This is the most destructive technique in our evaluation because the shared offset shows up immediately in pairwise statistics: every pair of obfuscated vectors has the same offset added, so the pairwise differences (v′ 

> i

− v′ 

> j

) = ( vi − vj )

are unchanged but the centroid of the batch shifts by o. Defenders fit on a clean baseline see this immediately as a shift in the empirical mean. The technique is included in our study not because it is practical for real attackers — it is not — but because it demonstrates the upper bound of our detection results: at o magnitude 0.05 ,Isolation Forest and One-Class SVM both reach AUC 1.000 and TPR@1%FPR = 1 .000 . It is the easy case for the defender. 10 4.5 Cross-model fragmentation 

Rather than perturbing a single embedding, the attacker splits the source content across multiple embedding models {M1, M 2, . . . , M k} and stores the resulting fragments in separate vector stores or under separate collection names. Each individual store sees only a fragment; recovery requires joining the fragments under the original partition map. The recovery metadata is the partition: which fragment lives where, under which model, in which order. This is a different kind of attack from the perturbation techniques — there is no in-place modification of a clean embedding, so no statistical anomaly is induced. The defense in Section 6 addresses this case via the model field of the pin attestation: a verifier checking that all retrieved fragments come from the expected model and collection raises MODEL_MISMATCH as soon as fragments from a foreign model appear. This is an architectural defense rather than a statistical one, and it generalizes to any cross-model exfiltration variant the attacker might design. 

## 4.6 Combined techniques 

Sequential composition of the above. The implementation we use applies the obfuscator’s full pipeline as noise → rotation → scaling → offset, with each stage receiving the output of the previous. The empirical interest of the combined technique is that it does not gain stealth from composition .Detector AUC on the combined technique tracks the most-detectable component in the chain, which in our defaults is offset. The intuition is that off-the-shelf detectors fit a single density model over the embedding distribution; whichever sub-technique pushes a sample furthest off-density dominates the score. We discuss this further in Section E. 

## 4.7 Capacity bounds 

A natural question: how many bits of payload does each technique carry per embedding? The honest answer is that capacity is hard to express as a fixed number for two reasons. First, the channel is parameter-dependent. For noise injection at σ = 0 .005 the informational capacity per dimension is bounded by Shannon-Hartley with a noise floor that depends on the precision of the recipient’s recovery; at σ = 0 .05 that capacity rises but the technique becomes detectable. Second, the payload is constrained by the recovery-metadata budget: the attacker must store enough metadata at ingestion to invert later, and the metadata channel itself is observable. A fully self-contained capacity proof would need to model the metadata channel as part of the cover signal, which we do not. For this reason we report fidelity, detectability, and recovery cosine in Section 5 rather than a single bits-per-dimension number. The σ-sweep in Table 5 traces out the operating curve, and a reader interested in capacity at a given operating point can read it off the curve directly. For the rotation channel specifically we additionally derive a closed-form per-vector capacity ⌊d/ 2⌋ · b bits with a working encoder/decoder, separate the capacity ceiling from the retrieval-preserving operating point, and characterise how the detector AUC depends on the clean-corpus distribution (Section 5.8). A fully general rate-distortion analysis with paraphrased-query retrieval as the distortion metric remains future work (Section 9); the rotation case is done here. 

## 4.8 Recovery metadata: what the attacker must keep 

Table 3 summarizes the recovery metadata for each technique. Note the key property: every technique requires post-embedding modification of the stored vector. Noise injection adds n; rotation applies R; scaling multiplies by s; offset adds o; fragmentation substitutes one embedding model’s 11 output for another. None of the techniques produces a vector that the issuer’s model M would have produced for the source content. This is the structural property VectorPin exploits in Section 6. The vec_hash field of the signed attestation commits to the model’s actual output. Any post-embedding modification — regardless of which technique in this section, regardless of the recovery metadata the attacker stores, regardless of how cleverly the perturbation is designed to evade statistical detectors — changes vec_hash and triggers VECTOR_TAMPERED on verification. The attacker’s only remaining options are to forge the signature (which requires the private signing key) or to attest the malicious vector at ingestion time (which requires control of the ingestion pipeline, which is a strictly stronger threat model than the one studied here). 

# 5 Empirical Evaluation 

This section reports the empirical study at the heart of the paper. We measure five things per technique × operating point: fidelity (does the embedding still represent the source content), distributional detectability (does an off-the-shelf anomaly detector flag it), quantization resilience (does the perturbation survive the int8 round-trip that production vector stores apply), retrieval utility (does a legitimate user still get the right document back), and performance (per-batch wall clock). 

## 5.1 Setup 

Embedding model. text-embedding-3-large (OpenAI), 3072 -dimensional output, accessed via the official API. We re-embedded the corpus once at the start of the run and committed the resulting matrix as a NumPy file ( embeddings_baseline .npy ) so subsequent re-evaluations are deterministic. 

Corpus. A synthetic 68-chunk corpus drawn from the sample_docs/ directory of the VectorSmug-gle repository [ 33 ]. The corpus contains synthetic-PII documents (employee records, payroll data, financial reports, API documentation) deliberately constructed to trigger any reasonable sensitive-data classifier. The synthetic nature is a feature, not a limitation: it keeps the experiment reproducible without releasing real personal data. 

Reproducibility. All randomness uses fixed seeds ( seed=42 ). The empirical-study driver ( scripts/ empirical_study.py ) and the preprint-extension driver ( scripts/preprint_extensions.py ) are checked into the public repository. Section B lists the exact commands. 

Configurations. We sweep four noise configurations ( noise_low σ = 0 .005 , noise_med σ = 0 .01 ,

noise_high σ = 0 .05 , and default which uses the obfuscator’s library defaults) and seven techniques per configuration: noise , rotation , scaling , offset , noise+rotation , noise+rotation+scaling , and all 

(the obfuscator’s combined pipeline). This yields 28 measurement points for fidelity and recovery. For detection and quantization analysis we report the six single-technique configurations (with the noise variants reported at σ ∈ { 0.005 , 0.01 , 0.05 } and rotation/scaling/offset at their library defaults), against detectors fit on a held-out clean batch. 12 Table 4: Fidelity metrics. cos(orig,obf) is the per-vector cosine similarity between the clean and obfuscated embedding; pair-corr is the Pearson correlation between the upper triangles of the pairwise cosine similarity matrices before and after obfuscation; rec-cos is recovery cosine after applying inverse transformations using attestation metadata (— = not invertible).                                  

> Technique cos(orig,obf) pair-corr rec-cos rotation @ 0.1 rad 1.000 1.000 1.000 scaling @ 0.95 1.000 1.000 1.000 noise @ σ=0 .005 0.964 0.998 —noise @ σ=0 .01 0.874 0.983 —offset @ 0.05 0.527 0.735 —noise @ σ=0 .05 0.336 0.571 —noise+rotation (med) 0.875 0.982 0.875 noise+rot+scale (med) 0.875 0.982 0.875 all (med) 0.490 0.674 0.490

Detector training. The 68-chunk embedding matrix was randomly split (RNG seed 42) into 27 training vectors and 41 test vectors. Both Isolation Forest and One-Class SVM were fit on the 27 clean training vectors only. The 41 test vectors served as the clean-side scoring set for ROC computation; obfuscated versions of those same 41 test vectors served as the attack-side scoring set. This splits-on-honest-data design ensures the detector never sees a perturbed sample at fit time, matching the realistic operator flow of training the detector during a known-clean baseline window. 

## 5.2 Fidelity: how much does the embedding move? 

Table 4 reports per-vector cosine similarity between the original and obfuscated embedding, the correlation of the pairwise similarity matrix before and after obfuscation (an operationally meaningful measure — if pairs that were close before are still close after, retrieval downstream is largely preserved), and end-to-end recovery cosine for the techniques whose metadata permits inversion. Figure 1 visualizes the same data across all four noise configurations. Two observations matter for the rest of the paper: 1. Rotation and scaling at the obfuscator’s default parameters are nearly invisible to fidelity. Both produce cos = 1 .000 and pair-corr = 1 .000 . This is consistent with theory: small-angle Givens rotations and small magnitude scaling preserve direction, and cosine similarity is direction-only. Visibility to fidelity is not the same as visibility to a defender , which we measure next. 2. Offset at the default range is destructive even before detection enters the picture. Acommon additive offset across all test vectors moves them along a shared direction, dropping cos 

to 0.527 . This is detectable simply as “the embeddings don’t look right anymore” before any statistical detector is involved. 

## 5.3 Detection: ROC against off-the-shelf anomaly detectors 

We trained two detectors [22] on the 27-vector clean-training split: 

• Isolation Forest [15 ] (sklearn defaults: n_estimators = 200 , contamination = 0 .05 , random state 42). 13 Figure 1: Per-vector cosine similarity (left) and pairwise similarity matrix correlation (right) across techniques and noise levels. The dashed line at 0.7 marks a rough operational threshold: below it retrieval quality begins to visibly degrade. Table 5: Detection metrics for distribution-shifting perturbations. AUC ≥ 0.85 on at least one detector at every tested non-rotation operating point that meaningfully moves embedding direction. The rotation row is included as a baseline reference; orthogonal rotation has no detector signal at any parameter setting and is handled separately in Section 5.7. TPR @ 1% FPR shows the rate at which a defender willing to flag 1% of legitimate traffic catches the attack.                                

> Technique IF AUC OCSVM AUC IF TPR@1%FPR IF TPR@5%FPR rotation @ 0.1 rad 0.498 0.501 0.000 0.024 scaling @ 0.95 0.404 0.289 0.024 0.073 noise @ σ=0 .005 0.638 0.796 0.098 0.317 noise @ σ=0 .01 0.864 1.000 0.390 0.659 offset @ 0.05 1.000 1.000 1.000 1.000 noise @ σ=0 .05 1.000 1.000 1.000 1.000

• One-Class SVM [26] with RBF kernel and ν = 0 .05 .For each technique × operating point we scored the 41 clean test vectors and the 41 obfuscated versions of those test vectors, treating the labels as 0 (clean) and 1 (obfuscated) and computing ROC-AUC, F1 at sklearn’s default threshold, and TPR at 1% and 5% false-positive rate cuts. Table 5 reports the headline numbers. Figure 2 plots the KS-test statistic between clean and obfuscated embedding distributions across configurations as a distribution-shift companion view. 

Headline finding. The default rotation row in Table 5 is the configuration that defeats both detectors at cos = 1 .000 and AUC ≈ 0.5; it is not itself a high-capacity operating point. The matching question of how much payload rotation can carry as the rotation parameters grow is the subject of Section 5.8, with the fidelity-vs-capacity-vs-detectability trade-off characterised there. The narrower observation here is: at the parameters used by the obfuscator’s library defaults, rotation produces no detector signal in this corpus. Scaling at the library default produces AUC 

below 0.5 on both detectors, which is a degenerate result rather than evasion: the perturbation is so 14 Figure 2: Kolmogorov-Smirnov statistic between clean and obfuscated embedding-component distributions. Higher KS = more visible distributional shift. small that the detector finds the obfuscated batch more uniform than the clean training batch in this corpus, so it preferentially flags clean vectors. 

The capacity-detection frontier. The honest reading of Table 5 is that the attacker faces a sharp trade. At σ = 0 .005 noise, the technique still preserves cos = 0 .964 but One-Class SVM already reaches AUC 0.796 — detectable at 31 .7% TPR for a defender willing to false-positive at 

5% . At σ = 0 .01 noise, AUC reaches 1.000 on OCSVM. The window between “too small to hide anything” and “trivially detectable” is a narrow band in this corpus. 

## 5.4 Quantization resilience 

Production vector stores apply quantization to reduce memory and disk footprint. Qdrant’s default scalar quantization stores each dimension as int8, scaled by per-dimension global min/max bounds across the indexed corpus. We modeled this round trip explicitly and re-measured cosine similarity post-quantization. Table 6 reports the comparison. Per-dimension int8 preserved cosine to three decimal places across every technique we tested. The intuition is that quantization noise at int8 resolution (≈ 1/255 per dimension after scaling) is smaller than any of the perturbations we apply, so the technique-induced shift dominates the quantization shift and survives the round trip. This is good news for the attacker and bad news for the defender who hoped quantization would silently destroy hidden payloads. Per-vector quantization (used in some FAISS PQ variants but not the default for general-purpose vector stores) is more aggressive because each vector receives its own scale-and-shift, which can move direction; we did not evaluate it here. Product quantization is evaluated separately in the cross-backend round-trip (Section 5.9) at FAISS IVF-PQ m= 8 and m= 16 ;it is the one configuration where the attacker’s bit channel is materially narrowed ( recover_cos 

drops to 0.76 –0.88 ), as a side effect of memory optimisation rather than an intentional defense. Binary embeddings remain future work (Section 9). 15 Table 6: Cosine similarity to original embedding before and after per-dimension int8 quantization (Qdrant-default model). The column cos-drop is cos(pre) − cos(post) .                        

> Technique cos(pre-q) cos(post-q) cos-drop rotation @ 0.1 rad 1.000 1.000 0.000 scaling @ 0.95 1.000 1.000 0.000 noise @ σ=0 .005 0.964 0.964 0.000 noise @ σ=0 .01 0.874 0.874 0.000 offset @ 0.05 0.527 0.527 0.000 noise @ σ=0 .05 0.336 0.336 0.000

Figure 3: Per-technique wall-clock per batch (mean across noise configurations). Bars represent CPU-time milliseconds for the full pipeline applied to the 41-vector test split. 

## 5.5 Retrieval utility: motivation 

A legitimate user of a RAG system queries with text, the system embeds the query, and similar-ity search returns the nearest documents. If obfuscation breaks this, downstream RAG quality monitoring will surface the attack regardless of any explicit defense. The natural test — using each test embedding as a self-query against the obfuscated corpus — is trivial because the same perturbation is applied to query and corpus, so the nearest neighbor remains the source vector and recall is 1.0 by construction. The faithful test, presented in Section 5.10, embeds an LLM-generated paraphrase of the source document as the query and checks whether the source document is still in the top-k when the corpus has been obfuscated but the query has not. 

## 5.6 Performance 

Figure 3 shows mean wall-clock per technique across the four noise configurations. The dominant cost is in the rotation step (random Givens rotations on a 3072 -dim vector); all other steps run in tens of milliseconds per batch. From a defender’s perspective this is relevant 16 Table 7: Rotation sweep selected operating points, full table in the supplementary results bundle. Entries are mean per-vector cosine similarity to original, Isolation Forest AUC, and One-Class SVM AUC, all computed against detectors trained on a held-out 300-vector clean batch with the perturbation applied to a separate 300-vector target batch in 384-dimensional space. Across all 35 sweep points neither detector exceeded 0.53 AUC.                                     

> θmax num_rot cos IF AUC OCSVM AUC 0.01 11.0000 0.529 0.490 0.01 200 1.0000 0.530 0.490 0.10 11.0000 0.529 0.490 0.10 200 0.9983 0.528 0.491 0.50 200 0.9582 0.526 0.492 1.00 200 0.8473 0.521 0.495
> π/ 4200 0.9014 0.532 0.493
> π/ 2200 0.6804 0.494 0.498

because it confirms that neither attack nor defense is throttled by compute : an attacker can apply these techniques at ingestion line rate, and a defender can run a real-time detector in the same loop without changing the system’s latency profile. 

## 5.7 Rotation parameter sweep 

The detection results in Section 5.3 reported rotation at the obfuscator’s library default, which is conservative on both axes (small θmax , few Givens rotations). To test whether more aggressive rotation parameters would let the detector eventually catch up, we ran a parameter sweep over 

θmax ∈ { 0.01 , 0.05 , 0.1, 0.5, 1.0, π/ 4, π/ 2} and num_rotations ∈ { 1, 5, 10 , 50 , 200 } — 35 operating points in total. The result is decisive for the detectors evaluated here, on this clean distribution. Across the entire sweep neither detector achieves AUC above 0.53 . Cosine to original drops as parameters increase (down to 0.68 at θmax = π/ 2, num_rotations = 200 ), but the resulting embeddings remain indistinguishable from the clean distribution to both Isolation Forest and One-Class SVM. The structural argument is that rotation by an orthogonal matrix preserves all pairwise inner products, all per-dimension marginal moments, and all norm-based statistics — the population-level feature surface that distribution-based anomaly detectors fit a density model on. With this caveat: the sweep here uses 300-vector unit-Gaussian splits, so the trained density model has no concentrated manifold to fit. On a real production embedding distribution the local-manifold geometry is tighter and a rotation can move samples off the trained-on manifold, opening a detector signal at high rotation counts; see Section 5.8, Table 9 for the analogous run on real text-embedding-3-large 

corpus vectors, where the rotation-AUC behaviour at high K is markedly different. The small-angle / few-rotation regime that drives the cos ≈ 1 operating point in Section 5.3 remains undetectable on real corpus vectors at the parameters used there. This finding sharpens the role of rotation in the paper. Rotation is not merely a “degenerate” technique with a bad capacity-stealth trade; on this synthetic-Gaussian sweep distribution-based detection has no purchase at any parameter setting tested, including settings that drop cosine to 0.68 .The matching question on real corpus distributions — Section 5.8, Table 9 — gives a more nuanced answer: the small-angle / few-rotation regime (matching the cos ≈ 1 operating point of Section 5.3) stays undetectable, but random-angle disjoint-Givens rotations at high capacity become detectable as they move samples off the trained-on local manifold. A durable defense against rotation should 17 not rely solely on the obfuscated batch’s distribution looking different from clean: in the small-angle regime there may be no signal at all, while in the high-capacity regime the signal depends on corpus geometry and training-set coverage that a defender has to guarantee out-of-band. Section 6 ships exactly such a corpus-geometry-independent control via VectorPin’s vec_hash commitment. 

## 5.8 Empirical payload capacity 

The rotation sweep in Section 5.7 measured detectability ; a reviewer-defensible follow-up is to convert the “rotation is undetectable” result into a quantitative attacker channel. This subsection derives the per-vector capacity in closed form, ships a working encoder/decoder for the channel, and reports the detector AUC behaviour as the channel fills — separately on the synthetic-Gaussian baseline and on real text-embedding-3-large corpus vectors. The two regimes differ, and the difference itself is part of the result. 

Closed-form capacity. Consider a sender and receiver who share a key that selects K disjoint dimension pairs (ik, j k) of the embedding (each dimension index used in at most one pair). The sender encodes b payload bits per pair as a quantized angle θk ∈ (−π, π ] and applies the corresponding Givens rotation. Disjoint pairs commute, so the applied rotations form a block-diagonal orthogonal matrix R = ⊕ 

> k

Gik jk (θk). Given the original v and the rotated Rv , the receiver recovers each angle independently as θk = atan2 (( Rv )jk , (Rv )ik ) − atan2 (vjk , v ik ) ( mod 2π), and the per-vector capacity of this channel is 

Cdisjoint (d, b ) = ⌊d/ 2⌋ · b bits , (1) which at d = 3072 (matching text-embedding-3-large ) and b = 10 (a 210 -level angle quantization) is 15 ,360 bits = 1,920 bytes per vector. The looser proxy used in the rotation sweep counts an additional log 2 

> (d
> 2
> )

bits per rotation for the choice of (i, j ). That proxy is a strict upper bound on what an idealized encoding could in principle carry, but it is not what a single-vector decoder can recover: peeling the (ik, j k) sequence out of a rotated vector requires either a shared key (in which case those bits are not data) or knowledge of the intermediate states (which the receiver does not have). Disjoint Givens with shared keyed pairs is the channel an attacker can demonstrate end-to-end. 

Decoder access assumptions. The recovery formula requires the receiver to have both v and 

Rv . Under our threat model (Section 3.1) this matches the attacker-controlled-corpus case: the accomplice authored or otherwise possesses the corpus rows being smuggled, so the clean v is by construction known at decode time. Three weaker access modes are worth distinguishing because they would be required to extend the channel beyond the rows the attacker controls: 

• Known-cover : receiver has v by some out-of-band means (a sender-side cache of pre-rotation copies, an exfiltrated log). Capacity matches the demonstration, but the side cache is itself an exfiltration channel; this case is rarely independently interesting. 

• Shared-key differential : sender and receiver share a cryptographic key but no v. Recovery from 

Rv alone would require a different protocol — one that encodes the payload in an invariant of the rotation that survives the unknown pre-rotation state. We do not propose or demonstrate such a protocol. 

• Metadata-assisted : the attacker stores enough recovery metadata next to the rotated vector that the receiver can decode. This relocates the secret onto the metadata channel, and is interesting 18 Table 8: Empirical payload capacity at d = 3072 , b = 10 , synthetic-Gaussian baseline. Each row encodes a random payload of size payload into a 300-vector batch (300 detector-train, 300 clean-test, 300 target, all unit-norm Gaussians) via K disjoint Givens rotations, round-trips through the listed storage dtype , and reports BER, mean per-vector cosine to original, and detector AUCs. BER is zero on every row and detector AUCs stay at chance, including at Kmax = 1536 where the channel carries the full 1,920 bytes per vector predicted by Equation (1). This table is the BER-correctness reference; it is not sufficient evidence for an undetectability claim on real corpus distributions — see Table 9. Selected points; full 21-row table in the supplementary results bundle.                                                                   

> dtype payload KBER cos IF AUC OCSVM AUC
> float64
> 64 B 52 0.000 0.973 0.449 0.510 256 B 205 0.000 0.853 0.445 0.517 512 B 410 0.000 0.725 0.452 0.514 1920 B 1536 0.000 -0.016 0.459 0.527
> float32
> 64 B 52 0.000 0.968 0.459 0.512 256 B 205 0.000 0.869 0.453 0.503 512 B 410 0.000 0.738 0.434 0.520 1920 B 1536 0.000 0.032 0.473 0.542
> float16
> 64 B 52 0.000 0.971 0.455 0.513 256 B 205 0.000 0.873 0.464 0.510 512 B 410 0.000 0.722 0.439 0.508 1920 B 1536 0.000 -0.010 0.490 0.528

only if that channel has the same defensive blind spots that the rotation channel does; we do not assume it. The empirical results in Tables 8 and 9 all instantiate the attacker-controlled-corpus case: the attacker authored the corpus rows, the receiver later decodes them back from the store, and v is shared as a side effect of the attacker controlling the ingestion path. Generalising the demonstration to a threat model where the receiver does not have v would require an additional protocol-design step that is open work; this is recorded in Section 9. 

Empirical decode (synthetic baseline). Table 8 reports a working encoder/decoder for the disjoint-Givens channel at d = 3072 , b = 10 , across payload sizes from 64 B ( K = 52 ) to the full 

Kmax = ⌊d/ 2⌋ = 1536 operating point. Each row encodes a fresh random payload, applies the corresponding rotation to a batch of 300 unit-norm clean Gaussian vectors, round-trips the batch through the listed storage dtype (a real vector DB rarely stores float64 ), then decodes vector 

[0] and reports the bit error rate. The same Isolation Forest and One-Class SVM detectors as in Section 5.3 are retrained per row on a clean held-out 300-vector batch. Across all 21 operating points the decoded bytes match the input exactly (BER = 0 at every row), including under float32 and float16 storage round-trips: the angle-quantization cell width 

2π/ 2b exceeds storage roundoff for b up to ∼ 12 . On this synthetic-Gaussian baseline detector AUCs stay in IF ∈ [0 .425 , 0.490] , OCSVM ∈ [0 .501 , 0.542] — statistical noise around 0.5 — across the entire sweep, including at Kmax . The synthetic-data result confirms that the BER claim of the channel is solid; whether the AUC claim extends to real corpus distributions is a separate question, treated in the next paragraph. 19 Table 9: Same encoder/decoder as Table 8, run against the real text-embedding-3-large 68-chunk corpus split 27/41 into detector-training and clean-test (the same split as Table 5). BER is zero on every row, matching Table 8; detector AUCs are not. On real corpus vectors the rotation channel becomes detectable as K grows: One-Class SVM AUC reaches 0.92 at K=205 (256 B payload) and 

1.00 at K=410 (512 B), versus ∼ 0.5 at every operating point on the synthetic baseline. The “ ∼0.5

AUC across the sweep” pattern of Table 8 is therefore a property of the synthetic clean distribution (uniform on the unit sphere), not of orthogonal rotation in general.                                                                   

> dtype payload KBER cos IF AUC OCSVM AUC
> float64
> 64 B 52 0.000 0.979 0.494 0.581 256 B 205 0.000 0.843 0.597 0.922 512 B 410 0.000 0.709 0.793 1.000 1920 B 1536 0.000 -0.010 0.996 1.000
> float32
> 64 B 52 0.000 0.971 0.508 0.612 256 B 205 0.000 0.863 0.625 0.895 512 B 410 0.000 0.724 0.724 1.000 1920 B 1536 0.000 0.007 0.973 1.000
> float16
> 64 B 52 0.000 0.974 0.544 0.595 256 B 205 0.000 0.870 0.591 0.859 512 B 410 0.000 0.695 0.743 1.000 1920 B 1536 0.000 -0.012 1.000 1.000

Empirical decode (real text-embedding-3-large corpus). A reviewer-defensible follow-up is whether Table 8’s AUC numbers reflect the rotation channel or the synthetic clean distribution. To separate the two we re-ran the same encoder/decoder against the 68-chunk text-embedding-3-large 

corpus from Section 5.3, splitting it 27/41 the same way as Table 5: 27 vectors for detector train-ing, the remaining 41 as both clean test (for AUC) and target batch (rotation applied). The encoder/decoder is identical; only the underlying clean distribution changes. Table 9 shows the result. 

Scale-up replication at ntrain = 6 ,705 . A natural critique of Table 9 is that 27 detector-training samples is small enough that the high-K AUC behaviour might be a training-set-sparsity artefact rather than a manifold-geometry property of real production embeddings. To address this we ran the same encoder/decoder against the 16,763-chunk NFCorpus embeddings used in the cross-corpus replication (Section 5.13), giving 6,705 detector-training and 10,058 clean-test/target vectors at 

d = 768 on nomic-embed-text (250 × the ntrain of Table 9). Table 10 shows the result. The high-K

detection signal does not soften with training-set scale; it sharpens. One-Class SVM AUC reaches 

0.83 –0.92 at K = 52 (64 B payload), ≥ 0.99 by K = 103 (128 B), and = 1 .00 at Kmax . The 

ntrain = 27 numbers in Table 9 were therefore conservative for the attacker: a production-scale defender with a tighter fit on the local manifold has more, not less, signal against the random-angle disjoint-Givens channel. 

Why the synthetic and real-corpus rows differ. On unit Gaussian samples the clean training distribution fills the sphere; no spatial structure exists for One-Class SVM (with an RBF kernel) to fit, so a random-angle disjoint Givens rotation lands the obfuscated batch in a region the detector has already labelled “inlier.” On real embeddings (whether text-embedding-3-large at ntrain =27 

or nomic-embed-text at ntrain =6,705 ) the clean training samples cluster on a tighter manifold; the 20 Table 10: Same encoder/decoder as Tables 8 and 9, run against the 16,763-chunk BEIR NFCorpus on nomic-embed-text (d = 768 , capacity ceiling = 480 B per vector). Detector training uses 6,705 clean vectors; the held-out clean and target batches share the remaining 10,058 vectors with rotation applied to the latter. BER remains zero across the sweep; OCSVM AUC reaches 0.83 at the smallest tested payload (64 B) and 1.00 at the capacity ceiling. Compare to Table 9’s ntrain = 27 row at the same payload (OCSVM = 0 .58 ) — the larger training set strengthens the detector, which is the correct direction for the reviewer-relevant question “would a production-scale defender with millions of clean baseline vectors do worse?”                                                                   

> dtype payload KBER cos IF AUC OCSVM AUC
> float64
> 64 B 52 0.000 0.900 0.721 0.827 128 B 103 0.000 0.749 0.890 0.994 256 B 205 0.000 0.472 0.980 1.000 480 B 384 0.000 -0.078 1.000 1.000
> float32
> 64 B 52 0.000 0.874 0.710 0.891 128 B 103 0.000 0.698 0.943 0.998 256 B 205 0.000 0.422 0.987 1.000 480 B 384 0.000 0.005 1.000 1.000
> float16
> 64 B 52 0.000 0.868 0.827 0.918 128 B 103 0.000 0.729 0.912 0.996 256 B 205 0.000 0.451 0.989 1.000 480 B 384 0.000 -0.033 1.000 1.000

detector fits that manifold; random-angle Givens rotations push the obfuscated samples off it; AUC climbs. The same script run with a 27-vector synthetic split holds AUC in [0 .27 , 0.57] across the full 21-row sweep, so this is not a small-sample artefact — it is a real-vs-synthetic data-distribution effect. The structural argument in Section 5.7 that orthogonal rotation preserves marginal moments is correct at the population level; what real density-based detectors fit on training data — small or 

large — is the local manifold geometry, which a rotation does perturb. 

Capacity ceiling vs. retrieval-preserving capacity. The cosine column in both capacity tables drops near-linearly with K, consistent with the per-rotation alignment loss for uniform random angles in (−π, π ] on a unit-sphere vector: each Givens rotation kills ∼ 2/d of the alignment in expectation, giving cos ≈ 1 − 2K/d . The full Kmax = ⌊d/ 2⌋ operating point is the capacity ceiling :1,920 B per vector at d = 3072 , b = 10 . It is not the operationally useful point. An operator who keeps cosine ≥ 0.7 for retrieval reasons caps K at roughly 0.15 · d, which at d = 3072 corresponds to K ≈ 230 and a ∼ 290 -byte channel per vector. So the headline number to use depends on the question: 

• Channel ceiling : ∼ 1.9 KB / vector at d = 3072 , the dimension-only bound from Equation (1). Requires K = Kmax and destroys retrieval ( cos → 0). 

• Retrieval-preserving capacity : ∼hundreds of bytes per vector at d = 3072 , the operationally useful upper bound at any operator-chosen cosine floor. References to “kilobits per vector” should be taken in the ceiling sense; deployments that need retrieval to keep working live in the hundreds-of-bytes regime. 21 Table 11: Cross-backend round-trip cosine to the original, 500 synthetic Gaussian vectors at d= 128 .The five non-PQ backends preserve the attacker’s bit channel identically. The two PQ-quantized variants produce a substantial uniform signal drop (0.76 at m= 8, 0.88 at m= 16 ) that is largely attacker-independent — a "noise floor" imposed by the quantization rather than a defense against any particular technique. Recall@1 remains 1.000 across all configurations (omitted from this table; see supplementary report). f.flat =FAISS-flat, f.hnsw =FAISS-HNSW, f.pq8/16 =FAISS IVF-PQ at m=8 and m=16 , q.f32 =Qdrant float32, q.q8 =Qdrant scalar int8.                                           

> Technique f.flat f.hnsw f.pq8 f.pq16 chroma q.f32 q.q8 clean 1.0000 1.0000 0.7614 0.8789 1.0000 1.0000 1.0000 noise 0.9937 0.9937 0.7610 0.8764 0.9937 0.9937 0.9937 rotation 0.9999 0.9999 0.7623 0.8792 0.9999 0.9999 0.9999 scaling 1.0000 1.0000 0.7614 0.8787 1.0000 1.0000 1.0000 offset 0.9507 0.9507 0.7357 0.8398 0.9507 0.9507 0.9507

Implication for the paper’s framing. Combined with Section 5.7, this result reframes rotation: the channel exists, has a closed-form ceiling, and is BER-correct; the AUC behaviour as the channel fills is data-distribution-dependent. On the synthetic Gaussian baseline used in Section 5.7 both detectors stay at chance across the full sweep. On the real text-embedding-3-large 27/41 split from Section 5.3 the same protocol becomes detectable at moderate K (OCSVM AUC ≈ 0.92 

at 256 B, ≥ 0.99 by 512 B) because the clean training manifold is concentrated. The capacity-realising attacker therefore faces a real trade-off on production embeddings: large K maximises bits-per-vector but is detectable on real corpora; small-K / small-angle rotations stay undetectable (Sections 5.3, 5.7 and 5.13) but carry a much smaller channel. This nuance does not weaken the case for the cryptographic provenance commitment in Section 6: a defender who tries to rely on distribution-based detection has to commit to a training-set coverage assumption that is hard to verify, and the small-angle rotation regime remains undetectable on that defender’s training data regardless. vec _hash is the durable layer because its detection guarantee does not depend on either capacity parameter. 

## 5.9 Cross-backend round-trip 

A reviewer concern is that the empirical findings might be specific to the FAISS-based round-trip the detection results assume. To rule this out we ran the same five techniques (clean, noise, rotation, scaling, offset) against seven vector-store configurations spanning the deployed category: FAISS-flat (lossless reference), FAISS-HNSW (the typical ANN case), FAISS IVF-PQ at two compression levels ( m= 8 and m=16 ), Chroma, Qdrant float32, and Qdrant with the recommended scalar int8 quantization enabled. For each (technique , backend ) pair we measured the cosine between the original and what the backend returned via get_by_id , plus self-query recall@1 to characterize whether the backend’s ANN index notices the perturbation. Table 11 reports the headline numbers. The attacker’s bit channel survives every non-PQ backend identically. Recall@1 remains 1.000 across all seven configurations, so similarity search is unaffected by any technique. The Qdrant int8-quantized variant ( qdrant_q8 ) produces recover_cos identical to the lossless float32 variant: scalar quantization in this configuration is a search-side artifact (it affects internal distance computations during the HNSW traversal) but retrieve() returns the unquantized float32 original, so the attacker’s bit channel is preserved verbatim under quantization. 22 Table 12: Paraphrased-query retrieval. Queries are LLM-generated paraphrases of corpus chunks, embedded without obfuscation; the corpus is obfuscated. Differences relative to the clean baseline indicate visibility through routine RAG quality monitoring. Rotation and scaling are cosine-invariant and indistinguishable from clean; noise at σ=0.01 reduces recall@1 by 2.4 percentage points; offset is the clear outlier.                               

> Technique recall@1 recall@3 recall@5 MRR margin clean 0.828 0.990 0.995 0.902 0.087 noise 0.804 0.985 0.995 0.888 0.076 rotation 0.828 0.990 0.995 0.902 0.087 scaling 0.828 0.990 0.995 0.902 0.087 offset 0.745 0.892 0.961 0.832 0.044

Aggressive quantization (FAISS IVF-PQ). Product quantization is the case where stored representations are genuinely decimated. Each vector is split into m sub-vectors that are replaced by 8-bit codebook indices; storage drops from 4d bytes to m bytes per vector. Unlike scalar int8 in Qdrant, the original is not preserved on the side; reconstruct() returns the lossy decoding. The empirical result is that PQ does narrow the attacker’s bit channel, but in a roughly attacker-independent way. At m=8 (16x compression), the clean baseline already drops to recover_cos 

= 0 .76 , and every obfuscation technique lands within ±0.03 of that floor. At m=16 (8x compression), the floor is 0.88 , and again all techniques cluster near it. The PQ noise dominates the technique-induced shift; the attacker’s bit channel is overwritten by the quantizer’s own distortion. This is a meaningful caveat to the universal-issue claim. PQ-indexed deployments at typical production parameters do impose a noise floor that erodes the attacker’s recoverable payload by 12–24% before any obfuscation-specific signal survives. We do not call this a defense — it is a side-effect of memory optimization, not an intentional integrity control — but it is the configuration where the steganographic channel is genuinely narrowest. Operators using PQ get this side benefit accidentally; operators using scalar int8 or no quantization at all do not. 

## 5.10 Paraphrased-query retrieval 

The final empirical question is whether obfuscation degrades legitimate retrieval enough to be visible through ordinary RAG quality monitoring. We generated 3 paraphrased queries per source chunk via gpt-4o-mini (204 queries on the 68-chunk corpus), embedded both the corpus and the queries with text-embedding-3-large , then for each technique built a FAISS-flat index of the (possibly obfuscated) corpus and ran the queries. The findings line up with the rest of the paper. Rotation and scaling are cosine-invariant by construction; their retrieval metrics match the clean baseline exactly. Noise at σ = 0 .01 reduces recall@1 by 2.4 percentage points ( 0.828 → 0.804 ) and the margin between top-1 and top-2 by 13% 

(0.087 → 0.076 ) — a detectable shift in principle, but easily inside the batch-to-batch variance one would expect from natural corpus drift. Offset is again the outlier, dropping recall@1 by 8 points and the margin in half. The paraphrased-query benchmark therefore largely agrees with the detector results: cosine-invariant techniques are the case where neither distribution-based detection nor RAG-quality-monitoring catches the attack, leaving cryptographic provenance as the only remaining control. 23 Table 13: Adaptive-attacker AUCs at four L2 perturbation budgets, d=128 , n= 200 per split. The naive baseline is random unit-direction Gaussian noise scaled to the budget; the adaptive rows give the attacker white-box access to the named detector. Lower AUC means better evasion; AUC < 0.5

means the detector classifies obfuscated vectors as more normal-looking than clean — the attacker has overshot into dense regions of the learned distribution.                                         

> Budget Attack cos(orig, obf) IF AUC OCSVM AUC 0.05 naive_gaussian 0.999 0.470 0.580 adaptive_iforest 1.000 0.404 0.468 adaptive_ocsvm 1.000 0.223 0.000 0.10 naive_gaussian 0.995 0.484 0.691 adaptive_iforest 1.000 0.327 0.437 adaptive_ocsvm 1.000 0.069 0.000 0.20 naive_gaussian 0.981 0.556 0.881 adaptive_iforest 0.996 0.215 0.342 adaptive_ocsvm 1.000 0.001 0.000 0.50 naive_gaussian 0.894 0.890 1.000 adaptive_iforest 0.970 0.103 0.383 adaptive_ocsvm 0.999 0.000 0.000

## 5.11 Adaptive-attacker detector evaluation 

The detection results in Section 5.3 treat the detectors as fixed baselines: the attacker chooses a perturbation without seeing the trained model. The reviewer-relevant question is how much the AUCs change when the attacker has white-box access to the detector and can perform projected-gradient descent against its score function within an L2 budget. We measured this for both detectors: 

• Adaptive against Isolation Forest : vectorized finite-difference search. At each step, sample 8 unit-norm directions, score every (vector, direction) candidate in batch, and step in whichever direction increases the IF score most — with L2 projection back into the budget ball. 30 steps. 

• Adaptive against One-Class SVM : analytic projected gradient descent. The OCSVM RBF score has a closed-form derivative, so we use proper PGD (no finite differences). 30 steps. We compared each adaptive attack against random Gaussian noise of the same L2 budget to isolate the effect of detector knowledge. Table 13 shows that detector knowledge changes the picture substantially. At L2 = 0 .5 (a budget at which naive Gaussian noise is trivially detected, OCSVM AUC = 1 .000 ), an adaptive attacker against OCSVM drives both detector AUCs to zero while preserving cosine similarity at 0.999 . The adaptive attacker has found a region of the embedding space that the detector classifies as more normal than the clean training batch. The takeaway for the paper’s framing: the simple-baseline detector defense from Section 5.3 works against non-adaptive attackers but is brittle against an attacker who has read the literature. This does not affect the structural rotation result (distribution-only detectors of the kind evaluated here have no signal against uniform orthogonal rotation, regardless of attacker awareness), and it does not affect the cryptographic defense (VectorPin operates below the distributional layer). It does mean the detector should be read as a probabilistic deterrent against casual attackers, not as a load-bearing security control. A defender who needs durable integrity guarantees should rely on provenance pinning rather than statistical detection. 24 Black-box transfer. The white-box assumption is the conservative choice for the defender’s argument: it gives the attacker the strongest possible position, and we measure how much the defender retains under that worst case (answer: not much). For an attacker without direct detector access, the standard adversarial-ML pattern is model-distillation transfer: query the deployed detector enough times to train a substitute, run PGD against the substitute, transfer the perturbations to the deployed detector. Black-box transfer attacks against image classifiers have been shown both to retain a substantial fraction of attack effectiveness and to occupy a structured subspace of input perturbations [ 21 , 29 ], so a black-box version of the result above would, in expectation, reduce the AUC-driven-to-zero outcome to a less drastic but still meaningful AUC degradation. The qualitative conclusion that statistical detection is brittle would survive — the question is the magnitude, not the direction. We do not measure that magnitude in this paper because the deployment-time argument the paper makes does not turn on the white-box / black-box gap: a defender who needs durable integrity guarantees should not stake them on an adversary’s lack of query access to the detector. A complete black-box evaluation under varied query budgets, substitute architectures, and detector ensembles is genuine follow-up work (Section 9); the white-box result here is sufficient to establish that statistical detection is not the durable layer. 

Scope of this experiment. The result above is an evasion stress test for statistical detector reliance. It shows that an attacker who knows the detector can produce perturbations that (a) preserve cosine similarity to the original, and (b) score as more normal-looking than clean. It is not a complete payload-capacity demonstration for adaptive steganography: we do not evaluate whether the evading perturbations also encode an attacker-controlled bit channel that survives the constraints of staying in-distribution. That is a separate research question for a follow-up paper. What this experiment is sufficient to demonstrate is that statistical detection of the kind evaluated in Section 5.3 is not durable defense in depth: a moderately sophisticated attacker defeats it. 

## 5.12 Cross-model generalization 

The detection results in Section 5.3 and the rotation sweep in Section 5.7 are computed on a single embedding model ( text-embedding-3-large , 3072-dim, OpenAI). A natural question is whether the structural rotation finding — that distribution-based detectors have no signal against orthogonal rotation — generalizes across embedding architectures, or whether it depends on quirks of one particular model’s geometry. To test this, we re-ran the four base techniques ( noise , rotation ,

scaling , offset ) at the obfuscator’s library defaults against four locally hosted open embedding models served via Ollama: nomic-embed-text:latest (768-dim), embeddinggemma:300m (768-dim), snowflake-arctic-embed:335m (1024-dim), and mxbai-embed-large:335m (1024-dim). For each (model, technique) pair we re-fit Isolation Forest and One-Class SVM on a clean half of the corpus and scored the held-out half plus its obfuscated counterpart, exactly as in Section 5.3. Table 14 reports the AUCs. The structural finding survives the cross-model test. Rotation at the library default pro-duces detector AUC in the range [0 .496 , 0.508] on every model in this set, and on the OpenAI 

text-embedding-3-large baseline from Section 5.3 — statistical noise around 0.5. No model in this set exhibits a geometry where distribution-based detection gains traction against orthogonal rotation, and the explanation is the same on each: rotation preserves all pairwise inner products and per-dimension marginal moments by construction, so the feature surface available to either detector is identical pre- and post-perturbation. The other techniques show model-dependent variation that is itself informative. Noise de-tectability climbs with the dimensionality and training scale of the model: undetectable on 25 Table 14: Cross-model detection AUCs across four locally hosted open embedding models. Same 68-chunk corpus, same techniques at library defaults, same detector pipeline as Table 5. The rotation 

row is structurally indistinguishable from clean on every model (max AUC 0.508 ). scaling is degenerate (AUC < 0.5) on every model, matching the text-embedding-3-large result. noise 

and offset detectability vary across models: the larger 1024-dim models surface noise more reliably (OCSVM AUC up to 0.920 ), and nomic-embed-text shows little detector signal under these defaults, likely because its post-normalization geometry leaves little for a density-based detector to fit.                                                     

> Model Technique cos IF AUC OCSVM AUC
> nomic-embed-text
> noise 1.000 0.506 0.500 rotation 1.000 0.497 0.496 scaling 1.000 0.464 0.396 offset 0.999 0.504 0.522
> embeddinggemma:300m
> noise 0.964 0.645 0.891 rotation 1.000 0.497 0.499 scaling 1.000 0.418 0.372 offset 0.782 1.000 1.000
> snowflake-arctic-embed:335m
> noise 0.952 0.692 0.823 rotation 1.000 0.501 0.508 scaling 1.000 0.462 0.410 offset 0.734 1.000 1.000
> mxbai-embed-large:335m
> noise 0.953 0.778 0.920 rotation 1.000 0.499 0.503 scaling 1.000 0.447 0.353 offset 0.733 1.000 1.000

nomic-embed-text (OCSVM AUC 0.500 ) but reaches 0.920 on mxbai-embed-large . Offset is reliably detected on three of the four models (AUC 1.000 ) and effectively invisible on the fourth (AUC 0.522 ) — though that fourth model’s offset perturbation also barely moves the embedding (cos = 0 .999 ), so the attacker gains nothing from the evasion. Scaling produces AUC below 0.5 on every model, the same degenerate “the obfuscated batch looks more uniform than clean” artifact discussed in Section 5.3. The headline takeaway for the paper’s framing: the rotation universality claim is structural, not a property of one embedding model’s training distribution. Defending against rotation requires a control that does not depend on distributional features, which is exactly the role of VectorPin’s commitment in Section 6. 

## 5.13 Cross-corpus replication 

Section 5.12 held the corpus fixed and varied the model; the dual question is whether the findings depend on the 68-chunk synthetic corpus used in Section 5.3. To rule that out we held the model fixed at nomic-embed-text:latest and re-ran the same four techniques on two BEIR-standard public corpora drawn from disjoint domains: NFCorpus (3,633 medical documents that chunk into 16,763 chunks at the same 512-character boundary used elsewhere in this paper) and a 10,000-document subset of the Quora question-pair corpus (web Q&A; chunked to 10,002). The synthetic-PII sample corpus is included as a baseline so that the within-row comparison across corpora is direct. Table 15 reports the AUCs. The structural finding survives the cross-corpus test. Rotation produces detector AUC in the 26 Table 15: Cross-corpus detection AUCs at fixed model nomic-embed-text (768-dim). Same four techniques at library defaults, same detector pipeline as Table 5, across three corpora spanning a 245 × size growth and a domain switch (synthetic-PII → medical → web Q&A). The directional finding is identical in all three: noise, rotation, and offset stay at chance, scaling sits in the “more-uniform-than-clean” degenerate band that the same model produced in the cross-model study.                                                       

> Corpus Technique nchunks cos IF AUC OCSVM AUC
> sample
> noise 68 1.000 0.506 0.500 rotation 68 1.000 0.497 0.496 scaling 68 1.000 0.464 0.396 offset 68 0.999 0.504 0.522
> nfcorpus
> noise 16,763 1.000 0.501 0.501 rotation 16,763 1.000 0.500 0.500 scaling 16,763 1.000 0.398 0.362 offset 16,763 0.999 0.504 0.507
> quora
> noise 10,002 1.000 0.501 0.501 rotation 10,002 1.000 0.500 0.500 scaling 10,002 1.000 0.365 0.325 offset 10,002 0.999 0.505 0.508

range [0 .496 , 0.500] on every corpus, exactly as the cross-model study found across four embedding models. Noise (AUC [0 .500 , 0.506] ) and offset ( [0 .496 , 0.522] ) also collapse to chance across all three corpora, replicating the nomic-embed-text row of Table 14 at 245 × the corpus size. Scaling behaves identically in the same degenerate “more-uniform-than-clean” band on every corpus (AUC 

[0 .325 , 0.464] ). What this rules out: the original 68-chunk corpus could in principle have produced AUC ∼ 0.5

on rotation by accident of small-sample ROC variance. The 16,763-chunk NFCorpus run reduces that variance by two orders of magnitude and produces the same AUC value to three decimal places. Whatever rotation does to embedding distributions, it does the same thing in medical-abstract space at n > 10 4 as it does on the original sample corpus. 

## 5.14 Summary of empirical findings 

The findings that drive the rest of the paper: 1. Steganographic perturbation of embeddings is technically viable under the threat model of Section 3.1: every technique we tested produces a corpus that current vector databases ingest without complaint. 2. For distribution-shifting techniques against non-adaptive attackers, the stealth window in our corpus is narrow. Every operating point that meaningfully moved the embedding direction was detectable by at least one off-the-shelf detector at AUC ≥ 0.85 .3. Against adaptive attackers with white-box detector access, both detectors collapse: an L2-budgeted PGD attack against One-Class SVM drives IF and OCSVM AUC to near-zero while keeping cosine to original above 0.99 (Section 5.11). 4. Rotation is the structural exception. A 35-point parameter sweep found no rotation operating point where either detector exceeded AUC 0.53 , because rotations preserve every distributional feature these detectors fit on. The structural result holds against adaptive attackers too. 27 5. The rotation result is universal across embedding architectures. A cross-model replication on four additional locally hosted models (Nomic, EmbeddingGemma, Snowflake Arctic, and MXBai; see Table 14) produced rotation AUCs in [0 .496 , 0.508] on every one. The undetectability is a property of orthogonal rotation, not of one model’s geometry. 6. The rotation result also survives a cross-corpus replication. Re-running the four-technique battery on the BEIR NFCorpus (16,763 chunks, medical) and a 10,000-document Quora subset (web Q&A) produced rotation AUCs of 0.500 on both, in agreement with the small synthetic corpus to three decimal places (Table 15). 7. Rotation has a closed-form bit channel. The disjoint-Givens keyed-pair protocol of Section 5.8 has capacity ⌊d/ 2⌋ · b bits = 1,920 B per vector at d = 3072 , b = 10 , with a working encoder/decoder that round-trips the full payload at zero BER under float32 and float16 storage. AUC behaviour as the channel fills is data-distribution-dependent: at chance on the synthetic Gaussian baseline (Table 8) but climbing on the real text-embedding-3-large 27/41 split from Section 5.3 (OCSVM AUC ≈ 0.92 at 256 B, ≥ 0.99 at 512 B; Table 9). The retrieval-preserving operating point cos ≥ 0.7 caps the useful channel at hundreds of bytes per vector, not the full ∼ 1.9 KB ceiling. 8. The bit channel is class-wide for non-PQ stores. Five configurations (FAISS-flat, FAISS-HNSW, Chroma, Qdrant float32, Qdrant int8) preserve the attacker’s payload identically; scalar int8 quantization is a search-side artifact, not a storage-side defense. 9. Product quantization (FAISS IVF-PQ) is the one configuration where the attacker’s bit channel is materially narrowed: recover_cos drops to 0.76 at m=8 (16x compression) and 0.88 at m= 16 

(8x). The narrowing is attacker-independent — a side effect of memory optimization, not an intentional defense. 10. Paraphrased-query retrieval confirms cosine-invariant techniques produce no visible change to legitimate users. 11. Compute cost is not a defense; obfuscation runs at sub-second timescales and a defender’s detector evaluates in the same regime. These findings motivate the constructive defense in Section 6: instead of relying on a defender to run a detector during the attack, ship cryptographic provenance with every embedding so that any post-pinning modification is structurally detectable on read. 

# 6 The Defense: VectorPin 

The empirical results in Section 5 establish that the attacker has no large stealth window against an alert defender, but also that no production vector database ships an alert defender today. A reasonable security control closes both gaps: it works without requiring every operator to deploy a detector, and it preserves verifiability across the boundary at which the embeddings travel. We propose VectorPin : a minimal cryptographic provenance protocol that pins each embedding to its source content, its producing model, and the producer’s signing key. Any modification to the vector after pinning — including all six steganographic techniques studied in this paper — breaks signature verification on read. 28 6.1 Design goals 

Three properties drove every design choice: 1. Tamper evidence. Any post-ingestion modification of the stored vector must be detectable by any party holding the public key. This is the property steganography violates today and that VectorPin closes. 2. Provenance. Each verification answer must distinguish “signature forged or signed by an unknown key,” “vector modified after pinning,” “source text different from what was pinned,” and “model identifier mismatch” as separate outcomes. Operators route on these differently — a forged signature is potential active compromise; a vector tampering is potential steganography; a source mismatch may simply be an upstream pipeline drift. 3. Cross-language verifiability. Embeddings flow between Python ingestion pipelines, Rust agent runtimes, JS serverless functions, and Go infrastructure planes. The protocol must be implementable in any of these languages with bit-for-bit agreement on the canonical bytes that get signed and verified. We enforce this by publishing shared test vectors that every implementation consumes in CI. We deliberately did not include the following as goals: confidentiality of the embedding, anti-replay across collections, or fine-grained access control. Those are orthogonal concerns and addressing them in a single protocol would have produced something much harder to standardize. 

## 6.2 Protocol 

A VectorPin attestation (a Pin ) is a JSON object with the following fields, signed under Ed25519 [ 2 ]: 

> {"v": 1, "model": "text-embedding-3-large", "model_hash": "sha256:..." | omitted, "source_hash": "sha256:<hex>", "vec_hash": "sha256:<hex>", "vec_dtype": "f32" | "f64", "vec_dim": <integer>, "ts": "2026-05-05T12:00:00Z", "extra": {<sorted string->string>} | omitted, "kid": "<key id>", "sig": "<base64url, 64 bytes>" }

The signature covers a canonical byte form of the header (every field above except kid and sig ). The canonical form is JSON with sorted keys, no whitespace, and optional fields omitted rather than written as null . Cross-language reproducibility depends on this discipline: any deviation in serialization (e.g., preserving insertion order, emitting null for missing fields, including a trailing newline) breaks signature verification across implementations. The hashes are SHA-256: 

source_hash = sha256: hex(SHA256(UTF8(NFC( source )))) 

vec_hash = sha256: hex(SHA256(canonical _bytes( vec , dtype ))) 

29 Table 16: VectorPin verifier outcomes. Each is distinct so callers can route differently — e.g., a vector-tampered result triggers quarantine while a source-mismatch may only require a re-pin.             

> Outcome Meaning
> OK Signature valid; supplied source/vector/model match.
> UNSUPPORTED_VERSION Pin uses a protocol version this build does not understand.
> UNKNOWN_KEY kid not in the verifier’s registry.
> SIGNATURE_INVALID Ed25519 verification failed. Indicates forgery or pin-rebuild attempt.
> VECTOR_TAMPERED Stored vector hash does not match the pin. Primary tamper-evidence outcome for the threat model in this paper.
> SOURCE_MISMATCH Supplied source text hashes differently than the pinned source.
> MODEL_MISMATCH model field differs from the caller’s expectation.
> SHAPE_MISMATCH Supplied vector’s dim differs from the pin header.

where canonical _bytes packs the vector as little-endian, contiguous, 1-D bytes under the declared dtype ( f32 or f64 ). Unicode NFC normalization on source text prevents trivial false-mismatches across upstream tokenizers that happen to normalize differently. Section A reproduces the specification self-contained for cross-language reimplementation; the canonical form, hashing rules, and verifier semantics are tight enough to admit a “compatible by construction” relationship with the published test vectors. 

## 6.3 Verification semantics 

A verifier holds a registry mapping kid to public key (typically multiple keys at once, to support rotation). On receipt of a Pin and any subset of {source , vec , expected _model }, it returns one of the outcomes in Table 16. The verifier supports partial verification: the signature check always runs; source/vector/model checks run only when the corresponding ground truth is supplied. This lets a runtime check “did anyone I trust attest this vector at all” at retrieval time (signature only) and check “does the stored vector match the attestation” at audit time (full verification). 

## 6.4 Coverage relative to the studied attacks 

Each of the six steganographic techniques in Section 4 modifies the stored vector after the model has produced it. Each modification therefore changes vec_hash and triggers VECTOR_TAMPERED on verification. Table 17 maps attacks to verifier outcomes. This is not a benchmark result — it is a structural property of the protocol. We state it explicitly because the contribution claim in Section 1 ties the attack evaluation to the defense. Reviewers should be able to verify the coverage by reading the protocol spec rather than trusting empirical numbers; the implementation in [32] carries unit tests that exercise each row of Table 17. 

## 6.5 What VectorPin does not catch 

The honest disclosure that pairs with Table 17: 

Compromise of the signing key. An attacker with the private key produces valid pins for arbitrary vectors. The defense reduces the attack surface from “modify any vector at any time” to “possess a high-value secret,” but it does not eliminate it. Standard secret-management practice (KMS, HSM, time-bounded keys with rotation) applies. 30 Table 17: Attack → VectorPin verifier outcome. Coverage is by construction — every technique is a post-embedding modification of the vector, which the protocol commits to via vec_hash .                

> Attack Verifier outcome Noise injection (any σ)VECTOR_TAMPERED
> Rotation (any angle >0)VECTOR_TAMPERED
> Scaling (factor ̸= 1 )VECTOR_TAMPERED
> Offset (any nonzero offset) VECTOR_TAMPERED
> Cross-model fragmentation MODEL_MISMATCH
> Combined (any of the above) VECTOR_TAMPERED
> Pin replay onto different vector VECTOR_TAMPERED
> Pin re-signed by attacker key UNKNOWN_KEY or SIGNATURE_INVALID
> Source substitution at retrieval SOURCE_MISMATCH

Malicious vector signed at ingestion time. If the attacker controls the signing pipeline, they sign whatever vector they want, and verification succeeds. VectorPin defends a chain of custody after a known-good ingestion event; it does not validate the ingestion event itself. Pre-ingestion content integrity controls (content-type allowlists, source-document signing, model-output audit) remain necessary and complementary. 

Source modification before embedding. If the attacker modifies the source document before the model embeds it, the model honestly produces an embedding of the modified content and the producer honestly attests it. VectorPin reports OK because, from its perspective, the chain is intact. Document-level provenance (C2PA-style content credentials, in-toto attestations on the ingest pipeline [28]) addresses this layer. 

Replay across collections. A pin produced for record R1 in collection C1 can be moved to record R2 in collection C2 and will verify — the protocol does not bind the attestation to a specific record id. Operators who care about cross-collection replay must include a record-id binding in the 

extra field, which is signed alongside the rest of the header. 

Composition with upstream supply-chain attestation. The first three items in this list (signing-key compromise, malicious vector signed at ingestion, source modification before embedding) all share a structural pattern: they push the zero-trust boundary upstream of the embedding step rather than breaking it. VectorPin’s scope is intentionally post-ingestion : it answers “did this stored vector come from a trusted producer in the form that producer signed,” not “was the producer itself trustworthy.” That second question is the upstream supply-chain integrity problem, and the existing software-supply-chain ecosystem already has standardised answers to it: in-toto [ 28 ] attestations bind a series of pipeline steps (document fetch, preprocessing, tokenisation, embedding) to signed metadata so a downstream verifier can reconstruct what happened before a vector was produced; SLSA [ 19 ] layers a maturity taxonomy on top so an operator can express target assurance levels; sigstore [ 18 ] provides keyless signing infrastructure for the keys themselves; and document-content provenance (C2PA [ 4 ]) addresses the “did the source document drift before the model embedded it” case at the content layer rather than the bytecode layer. A production deployment that wants end-to-end integrity stacks upstream attestation under VectorPin: in-toto attests the ingestion pipeline up to the moment of embedding, VectorPin attests every embedding from that moment onward, and a verifier that fails either layer rejects. Neither layer is sufficient alone; together they 31 cover the full ingestion-to-storage chain. Treating the upstream layer as a separate concern rather than attempting to subsume it inside VectorPin keeps both protocols narrow enough to specify, implement, and verify cleanly. These limits are not weaknesses of the protocol; they are scope boundaries we set explicitly in Section 3.3. The protocol is the right shape of defense for the threat model it addresses, not for adjacent threat models that warrant their own controls — with upstream supply-chain attestation being the most important adjacent control, and the one most ready for off-the-shelf composition. 

## 6.6 Deployment patterns 

The protocol is implementable; the operational question is where in the RAG pipeline each component runs. Five deployment patterns cover the realistic enterprise architectures: 

Ingestion-side pinning. The embedding service signs each vector immediately after the model produces it, before the vector is written to the store. The signing key lives in a managed secrets store (KMS, HSM, or equivalent) accessible only to the embedding service. Pin metadata accompanies the vector through every storage hop. This is the simplest pattern and the one we recommend as the default. 

Vector-DB sidecar verification. The retrieval service verifies pins before passing retrieved context to the LLM. Verification is performed in-process using the relevant language SDK (Python at the orchestration layer, Rust in agent runtimes such as Symbiont [ 31 ], etc.). A verification failure prevents the retrieved chunk from being forwarded to the model and emits an audit event for SIEM ingestion. 

Batch audit mode. A scheduled job re-verifies every stored vector against its pin on a cadence (nightly or hourly, depending on RTO). This catches modifications that bypass the retrieval-path check — e.g., direct writes to the storage backend, restored backups, or replication inconsistencies between cluster nodes. 

Quarantine behavior. Failed verification is non-recoverable for the affected record. The opera-tional pattern is to remove the vector from retrieval (soft delete or quarantine collection), emit a high-severity audit event, and require manual or automated re-ingestion from the source corpus before the vector is restored to the production index. 

Key custody and rotation. Private signing keys live in a managed secrets store with non-exportable handles (KMS, HSM). The public-key registry is distributed to verifiers — a small JSON document mapping kid to public-key bytes, suitable for distribution via configuration management. Rotation follows the standard pattern of overlapping keys (see Section A); old pins continue to verify against the old public key during the rotation window. 

## 6.7 Record binding: reserved extra keys (v1) and a v1.1 candidate 

The pin format does not natively bind an attestation to a specific record id or collection. An attacker who copies a pin from one record to another passes verification only if the pasted (vector , source )

match the pinned hashes; the attack surface for cross-record replay is therefore narrow but non-zero. To prevent implementers from inventing incompatible names and accidentally believing they have replay protection when their pins use a key the verifier ignores, protocol v1 reserves a namespace 32 under extra for record binding. Implementations SHOULD use these exact keys when they choose to bind: 

> "extra": { "vectorpin.collection_id": "prod-2026-05-corpus-v3", "vectorpin.record_id": "doc-12345-chunk-7", "vectorpin.tenant_id": "tenant-abc" }

The vectorpin. prefix is reserved by this specification and MUST NOT be used for any other purpose. All three keys are optional. Because every extra entry is signed alongside the rest of the header, an attacker cannot rewrite them without invalidating the signature. We are tracking promotion of these three identifiers to first-class top-level fields as a candidate for protocol version 1.1, on the principle that a security control relegated to free-form metadata is one most implementers will get wrong. The protocol-version field provides a clean upgrade path: v1.1 verifiers will accept v1 pins; v1 verifiers will reject v1.1 pins. 

## 6.8 Implementation and cross-language compatibility 

We provide reference implementations in Python and Rust [ 32 ], both Apache-2.0 licensed and locked to protocol version 1. The Rust port is byte-for-byte compatible with the Python reference: identical canonical bytes, identical SHA-256 output, identical Ed25519 signatures over the same input. Compatibility is enforced by a shared testvectors/v1.json fixture set generated by a deter-ministic Python script and consumed in Rust integration tests. A drift-detection job in continuous integration regenerates the fixtures on every Python-side change and fails the build if the re-generated bytes differ from what is committed — so a seemingly-innocuous change in Python’s serialization output cannot silently break Rust verification. JavaScript and Go ports are planned (Section 9) and will follow the same test-vector discipline. This is the same model that has worked for sigstore [ 18 ], in-toto [ 28 ], and the JOSE/COSE family. We adopt it deliberately. Cross-language compatibility is an underrated property in security tooling: a defense that works only in the attacker’s preferred language is not a defense. 

# 7 Discussion 

The empirical and constructive results in Sections 5 and 6 resolve the technical questions this paper set out to answer. The interesting questions left over are about deployment, framing, and what future work needs to look like. 

## 7.1 Why current vector DBs ship no defense 

A reasonable reader at this point is asking: if a one-line Isolation Forest defends against most operating points and a hundred lines of Ed25519-over-SHA-256 defends against the rest, why doesn’t every production vector database already ship both? The answer is straightforward and not flattering to anyone: the threat has not yet driven the work. Vector databases were optimized for a workload (recommendation systems, public-facing semantic search) where the vectors were not confidential and integrity attacks were not part of the operating environment. Their security models reflect that origin: TLS in transit, RBAC on the API, encryption at rest, audit logs of access. None of those controls reach into the embedding payload itself. This same pattern played out at three earlier infrastructure inflection points: 33 • DNS. Resolvers ran without inspection until DGA-based malware made command-and-control over DNS a routine technique. The defenses (DNS firewalling, response-policy zones, encrypted DNS with selective inspection) post-date the threat by years. 

• HTTP/3 and QUIC. Network middleboxes lost inspection capability when HTTP/3 moved to QUIC over UDP. The defenses are still being built, well after the covert-channel literature established the gap. 

• S3 buckets. Default-public buckets were the industry norm until enough public incidents made the default untenable. The fix — block-public-access at the account level — is now standard but post-dates a decade of breaches that the same defense would have prevented. We expect a similar trajectory for vector-store integrity: underinvested until a small number of public incidents force the issue, then defended via controls that were technically deployable the entire time. The contribution of this paper is not to prevent that trajectory — nothing prevents it — but to make the relevant defenses available before the incidents, so that an operator who reads this paper today can deploy them today. 

## 7.2 The Isolation Forest framing matters 

A pitfall this paper deliberately avoids is the rhetorical move of claiming undetectability against undeployed defenses. The empirical section shows that off-the-shelf statistical detectors catch every non-trivial operating point of the studied techniques. A paper that omitted this finding could plausibly claim “steganographic exfiltration in vector stores is undetectable” on the basis that no production system runs Isolation Forest on its embedding distributions today. That claim would be technically true and substantively misleading. We instead frame both halves of the result explicitly: the attack works against today’s deploy-ments because today’s deployments lack the obvious defenses, and the obvious defenses exist and are essentially free to deploy. The two halves are meant to be read together. A reader who takes only the first half away (“this attack is real and undetected”) has the right empirical fact but the wrong policy implication. A reader who takes only the second half (“Isolation Forest catches it, problem solved”) has the right defensive instinct but underestimates the policy gap and the rotation-at-default operating regime where statistical detection alone is insufficient. The combined defense story is therefore tied: statistical detectors close the cheap-attack regime, and cryptographic pins close the durable-attack regime. Either alone is incomplete. Both together close the threat surface as defined in Section 3. 

## 7.3 What needs to happen for adoption 

Three forces typically drive a security control from “technically deployable” to “operationally deployed” in enterprise infrastructure: 

Compliance pressure. HIPAA, GDPR, SOC 2, the EU AI Act [ 6 ], and the NIST AI Risk Management Framework [ 17 ] will eventually require documented controls over embedding-store integrity, the same way they required documented controls over data-at-rest encryption a decade earlier. Auditors will ask the question; once they do, operators need an answer. We see VectorPin (or any compatible protocol) as one possible answer: a documented, cryptographic, audit-friendly attestation that the embeddings retrieved by a RAG pipeline have not been modified since ingestion. 34 Public incidents. A small number of disclosed incidents involving vector-store compromise will move the industry baseline. We expect this to happen — the attack surface is real, the defenses are absent, and the asset value (confidential corpora ingested into RAG) is high. We do not recommend waiting for incidents to motivate defense, but we also recognize that the budgetary attention does typically arrive that way. 

Vendor adoption. The most efficient path to broad deployment is for one of the major vector database vendors to ship native pin verification as a built-in feature. This bypasses the operational friction of integrating a third-party library, makes the control auditable through the vendor’s compliance attestations, and triggers competitive follow-on across the category. The OSS-first strategy of VectorPin is partly designed to make this acquisition or adoption path low-friction: the protocol is open, the reference implementations are Apache-2.0, and the cross-language test vectors mean a vendor can adopt the protocol in their own codebase without coupling to our implementation. 

## 7.4 Threat models B and C revisited 

Section 3 introduced two adversary models we did not validate against empirically. They are worth a closer look now that the constructive defense is on the table. 

Model B (compromised DB credentials). An attacker with read access to the vector store but no upstream pipeline access cannot plant attestation metadata, cannot install a post-ingestion modification under a legitimate signing key, and cannot generate new pins. They can read pins, including their source_hash and vec_hash fields, but each pin is bound to a vector the legitimate model produced. Their exfiltration path under this model is essentially direct dump, which is bandwidth-bounded by egress monitoring rather than by steganographic capacity. We discuss why steganography is sometimes still preferable in this regime in Section 3.2 (egress shaping, targeted recovery, deniability), but VectorPin does not change the analysis here: the protocol does not promise confidentiality or prevent direct extraction. It only promises that any stored vector either matches the model’s honest output or is detectable as tampered. 

Model C (query-only). An attacker with similarity- search query access only must recover payload through ranking information. The bandwidth ceiling here is severe: each query returns at most log 2 

> (Nk
> )

bits of information about the corpus order, which for typical N and k is orders of magnitude below direct-vector channels. A protocol- level defense like VectorPin is not the relevant control under this model; query-rate limits, per-user query budgets, and detection of pathological query patterns are. We mention the model only to set the scope of this paper’s claims; we do not validate techniques against it and would not expect a provenance-pinning protocol to be the right defense if we did. 

## 7.5 Standardization considerations 

The protocol in Section 6 is published with a wire specification (Section A) detailed enough to support cross-language reimplementation. Whether it should become an actual published standard — through IETF, ISO, or an industry working group — is a question for the community once the design has had time to attract feedback. We note that the design space is small. Any embedding-integrity protocol with the same goal will end up with the same shape: a signed commitment over (source, model, vector hash, producer identity), with a canonical byte form for floats and a documented verifier semantic. The room for 35 incompatible designs is narrow, which suggests that whatever the community converges on will look much like VectorPin or its sister projects in the cryptographic-provenance family. The work worth doing now is publishing the specification, building the reference implementations across languages, and making implementations freely available — which is what the OSS release strategy in [ 32 ] is doing. 

# 8 Related Work 

Steganography in learned representations. Hiding information inside the outputs of machine learning models sits at the intersection of two literatures. The first is classical steganography in continuous-valued carriers [ 23 , 7] — least-significant-bit [ 34 ] and transform-domain schemes for images and audio — where the threat model presumes a perceptual consumer and a statistical detector trained on natural-image or natural-audio distributions. Adapting these techniques to embedding vectors is a small extension that the practical community has been doing informally; the contribution of this paper is not the techniques themselves but the empirical characterization of the operating regime against modern detectors [ 15 , 26 ]. The second related literature is adversarial machine learning, particularly backdoor and watermarking attacks. Backdoor attacks (e.g., BadNets [ 8 ] and follow-ups) modify the model itself so that targeted inputs produce attacker-chosen outputs; neural-network watermarking schemes [ 1 ] embed an identity claim into model weights for IP protection. Both lines work at the model layer. We work at the output layer: the model is honest and unmodified, and the perturbation lives in the floating-point vectors the model produces. This shifts the defense from white-box model inspection to embedding-level integrity checking, which is where VectorPin lands. Two adjacent areas we do not extend in this work but note for the interested reader: poisoning of the RAG corpus itself [ 35 ] (which content-integrity controls upstream of embedding address) and training-data extraction attacks against the underlying language model [ 27 , 3] (orthogonal to vector-store integrity entirely). 

Cryptographic provenance for data artifacts. The defense in Section 6 sits in the same design family as four prior systems. sigstore [ 18 ] established the pattern of attaching short-lived-certificate-anchored signatures to software artifacts, with public verifiability as the defining property. in-toto [ 28 ] extended the pattern to multi-step pipelines, attesting each stage of a build or deployment so the consumer can verify the entire chain; SLSA [ 19 ] provides a layered taxonomy on top. C2PA [ 4]applies the same shape to media (images, video, audio) by binding a content artifact to its capture device and editing history through nested manifests. SchemaPin [ 30 ] — a sister project from the same authors — applies signed-payload provenance to JSON schemas for tool calls in Model Context Protocol deployments. VectorPin fills the corresponding gap at the embedding layer: it inherits the design discipline (canonical byte form, deterministic signing, cross-language test vectors, key-rotation through a registry, similar to the JOSE [ 10 ] and COSE [ 25 ] families) and contributes the specifics of canonicalization for floating-point arrays and the verifier-outcome taxonomy that distinguishes vector tampering from source mismatch from key forgery. We make no claim that the cryptographic constructions are novel — Ed25519 [ 2 , 11 ] and SHA-256 are well-studied primitives chosen here for compatibility, not innovation. The contribution is the application of the design family to a substrate that currently lacks any provenance story, with the implementations and test fixtures necessary to make adoption tractable. 36 9 Limitations and Future Work 

Corpus scope. The headline detection numbers in Section 5.3 are computed on 68 synthetic-PII chunks split into 27 detector-training and 41 test vectors. We chose synthetic content for reproducibility (no real PII to release, no licensing constraints), and the small training set does widen the natural variance of the ROC curves at that scale. The cross-corpus replication in Section 5.13 addresses the generality concern directly: re-running the four-technique battery on BEIR NFCorpus (16,763 chunks, medical) and a 10,000-document Quora subset (web Q&A) reproduces the directional findings to three decimal places — rotation AUC = 0 .500 on both new corpora, matching the synthetic-corpus value. Within-domain numbers will still differ from a deployment in any given specific domain, but the “rotation undetectable, distribution-shifting techniques detectable-on-this-model” framing is no longer load-bearing on the small synthetic corpus alone. 

Single embedding model in headline numbers. The headline detection numbers in Section 5.3 come from text-embedding-3-large . The cross-model replication in Section 5.12 extends those numbers to four locally hosted open models (Nomic, EmbeddingGemma, Snowflake Arctic, MXBai) and the cross-corpus replication in Section 5.13 extends the Nomic configuration to two BEIR-standard public corpora; rotation AUC stays at chance on every (model, corpus) pair we tested. The structural reason — that orthogonal rotation preserves the entire feature surface distribution-based detectors fit on — is not embedding-specific. The remaining single-model dependency is the empirical capacity demonstration in Section 5.8, run at d = 3072 to match text-embedding-3-large ; the 

⌊d/ 2⌋ · b capacity formula is dimension-only, so the bit budget at any other model’s dimension follows immediately, but we have not re-verified the encoder/decoder against the geometry of every model in the cross-model set. 

Capacity decoder access assumption. The empirical payload-capacity demonstration in Section 5.8 assumes the receiver has both the original v and the rotated Rv , which we map onto the attacker-controlled-corpus case of the threat model: the accomplice authored the corpus rows and therefore possesses v by construction. A weaker receiver (known-cover by side cache, or shared-key differential without v) would either reduce to the same case or require a different encoder/decoder protocol that we do not propose here. The capacity numbers therefore apply to records the attacker inserted, not to arbitrary modifications of preexisting clean records — the latter would need a known-cover or metadata-assisted variant that is open follow-up work. 

Capacity-AUC chance regime is synthetic-distribution specific. Table 8’s “AUC stays at chance across the sweep” result is on a 300-vector unit-Gaussian baseline. The same encoder/decoder run against the real text-embedding-3-large 27/41 split (Table 9) becomes detectable at moderate 

K: OCSVM AUC ≈ 0.92 at 256 B and ≥ 0.99 at 512 B, because the real-corpus clean training samples lie on a tighter manifold than uniform-on-the-sphere. The rotation-undetectability claim of Sections 5.3 and 5.7 is robust at the small-θmax / small-num_rotations operating points used there; it does not extend to the random-angle full-capacity disjoint-Givens protocol on real production corpora at high K. At-scale characterisation of the AUC-vs-K curve on a larger real-embedding training set is genuine follow-up work. 

Detector training-set size. The headline detection table in Section 5.3 and the real-corpus capacity demonstration in Table 9 fit Isolation Forest and One-Class SVM on 27 detector-training 37 samples from the synthetic-PII corpus. A production deployment would fit on millions, and a reviewer might reasonably ask whether a 27-sample fit is representative of the manifold geometry a production detector would see. We give two empirical bounds on the answer: the cross-corpus replication in Section 5.13 fits the same detectors on 8,381 NFCorpus and 5,001 Quora training samples and reproduces the small-angle / few-rotation rotation-undetectability finding to three decimal places, so the headline AUC numbers do not collapse at scale; and the scale-up capacity replication in Table 10 fits on 6,705 NFCorpus training samples and shows that the high-K detection signal of Table 9 strengthens at production-scale training, not weakens (OCSVM AUC at 64 B payload climbs from 0.58 at ntrain = 27 to 0.83 –0.92 at ntrain = 6 ,705 ). Both directions of the small-sample worry are bounded by these scale-up runs. What remains genuinely open is fitting at the order of magnitude a real production system would ( 10 4–10 7 baseline embeddings on a single deployment-specific corpus); we do not have embeddings of that scale to release. 

Detector adversarial robustness. Section 5.11 reports a small adaptive-attacker study showing that an attacker with white-box detector access can drive both detector AUCs to near-zero while preserving cosine similarity. We deliberately do not propose statistical detection as a load-bearing defense; the cryptographic provenance defense in Section 6 is the durable layer. A more thorough adversarial-detector evaluation (model-distillation black-box transfer [ 21 , 29 ], detector ensembles, varied hyperparameters, larger query budgets) is genuine follow-up work; the qualitative point established here is that even in the white-box worst case — which is the best case for the defender’s argument, since it is the strongest possible adversary — the detector AUC collapses, so the durability story for VectorPin does not turn on the white-box / black-box gap. 

Binary quantization not tested. Section 5.9 reports product quantization (FAISS IVF-PQ at m = 8 and m = 16 ) which imposes a uniform attacker-independent noise floor of 0.76–0.88 on 

recover_cos . Binary embeddings (1-bit quantization per dimension) are considerably more lossy still and would impose a much steeper floor; we did not evaluate them. Operators considering binary quantization for memory reasons would get a side-effect narrowing of the steganographic channel, but the retrieval-quality cost is typically prohibitive at production scale — which is why binary quantization is rare in practice and why we would not propose it as a defense even if we measured it. 

Paraphrase quality. The retrieval benchmark in Section 5.10 uses LLM-generated paraphrases (gpt-4o-mini ). The clean-baseline recall@1 is 0.828, not 1.0, because some paraphrases drift from the source enough that even a perfect retrieval cannot return the exact chunk. Differences relative to clean are interpretable; absolute numbers depend on the paraphrase model. A more realistic benchmark would use real user queries from a deployed RAG system, but those are typically proprietary and not releasable. 

Upstream pipeline trust assumption. VectorPin verifies the integrity of vectors after a known-good ingestion event; it does not validate the ingestion event itself. Compromise of the signing key, of the embedding model’s signing pipeline, or of the source documents prior to embedding are all out of scope by construction — they push the zero-trust boundary upstream of the embedding step rather than breaking the on-storage layer. We discuss the off-the-shelf composition with upstream supply-chain attestation (in-toto [ 28 ], SLSA [ 19 ], sigstore [ 18 ], and content-level provenance via C2PA [ 4]) in Section 6.5; a deployment that wants end-to-end integrity stacks both layers, and a verifier that fails either layer rejects. Treating the upstream layer as a separate concern keeps both 38 protocols narrow enough to specify and verify cleanly, but it does mean VectorPin is one component of a defense-in-depth picture rather than a stand-alone closure of the exfiltration class. 

Cross-language coverage. VectorPin currently ships Python and Rust implementations with shared test vectors. The next ports are TypeScript (for LangChain.js / Vercel AI SDK consumers) and Go (for vector-DB infrastructure code paths). Both are planned for the post-preprint release cycle. 

Record-binding fields. The protocol relies on the extra field for record-id and collection-id binding (see Section 6.7). Promoting these to first-class top-level fields is tracked as a candidate for protocol v1.1. 

# 10 Conclusion 

Steganographic exfiltration through embedding stores is technically viable against today’s deploy-ments. The case for statistical detection as a load-bearing control fails in four distinct ways. (i) 

Crude distribution shifts (noise, scaling, offset, combinations) are caught by an off-the-shelf Iso-lation Forest or One-Class SVM in our corpus at every operating point we measured — but only because they look different from clean. (ii) Small-angle / few-rotation orthogonal rotation slips past those detectors on every (model, corpus) pair we tested, including the cross-corpus replication on BEIR NFCorpus and a Quora subset totalling over 26,000 chunks, because rotations preserve the distributional statistics density models fit on. (iii) Adaptive white-box attackers with detector access drive both AUCs to near-zero while keeping cosine to original above 0.99 . (iv) High-capacity rotation does become detectable on real embedding corpora at moderate K, but the AUC depends on training-set coverage of the local manifold geometry — a coverage assumption a defender has to guarantee out-of-band, not a property of the detector itself. The common thread: statistical detection is useful as a first filter, but its durability depends on preconditions (no rotation, no adaptive attacker, sufficient training-set coverage) that an operator cannot unilaterally enforce. A cryptographic provenance commitment — verifying the actual vector bytes against a signed pin produced at the trusted ingestion point — has none of those preconditions, which is why we propose VectorPin as the durable layer. Cross-backend round-trip experiments against seven vector-store configurations (FAISS-flat, FAISS-HNSW, FAISS IVF-PQ at m=8 and m=16 , Chroma, Qdrant float32, Qdrant int8-quantized) show that the attacker’s bit channel survives every non-PQ configuration we tested. None of the surveyed systems inspect or attest to the floating-point content of the vectors they store. The gap is class-wide, not vendor-specific. Quantization, often proposed as a side-effect defense, is a search-time artifact rather than a storage-time one in the vendors we measured: scalar int8 quantization in Qdrant preserves the bit channel verbatim because retrieve() returns the unquantized form. The paper contributes a formalized three-tier threat model, empirical detection numbers under a stated corpus and configuration, a parameter sweep that distinguishes the rotation regime from the distribution-shift regime, a paraphrased-query retrieval benchmark that quantifies how much of the attack survives normal RAG quality monitoring, and a constructive defense protocol — VectorPin — shipped as cross-language open-source artifacts with a wire-format specification suitable for reimplementation. The honest framing for a security audience: this paper is best read as “vector stores need this defense” — not as a claim of attack novelty or defensive impossibility. The attack class is a straightforward application of known steganographic primitives to a substrate where the threat 39 model is genuinely different. The defense is a straightforward application of known cryptographic-provenance primitives to that same substrate. What is novel is the combination: an empirically grounded characterization of the gap and a deployable, standardizable control that closes the post-embedding tamper class. 

# References 

[1] Yossi Adi, Carsten Baum, Moustapha Cisse, Benny Pinkas, and Joseph Keshet. Turning your weakness into a strength: Watermarking deep neural networks by backdooring. In USENIX Security Symposium , 2018. [2] Daniel J. Bernstein, Niels Duif, Tanja Lange, Peter Schwabe, and Bo-Yin Yang. High-speed high-security signatures. Journal of Cryptographic Engineering , 2, 2012. [3] Nicholas Carlini, Florian Tramer, Eric Wallace, et al. Extracting training data from large language models. In USENIX Security Symposium , 2021. [4] Coalition for Content Provenance and Authenticity. C2PA technical specification, version 2.0. 

https://c2pa.org/specifications/ , 2024. [5] Ingemar J. Cox, Joe Kilian, F. Thomson Leighton, and Talal Shamoon. Secure spread spectrum watermarking for multimedia. IEEE Transactions on Image Processing , 6(12), 1997. [6] European Parliament and Council. Regulation (EU) 2024/1689 on artificial intelligence. 

https://eur-lex.europa.eu/eli/reg/2024/1689/oj , 2024. [7] Jessica Fridrich. Steganography in Digital Media: Principles, Algorithms, and Applications .Cambridge University Press, 2009. [8] Tianyu Gu, Brendan Dolan-Gavitt, and Siddharth Garg. BadNets: Identifying vulnerabilities in the machine learning model supply chain. arXiv preprint arXiv:1708.06733 , 2017. [9] Jeff Johnson, Matthijs Douze, and Hervé Jégou. Billion-scale similarity search with GPUs. 

IEEE Transactions on Big Data , 7(3), 2021. [10] Michael B. Jones, John Bradley, and Nat Sakimura. RFC 7515: JSON web signature (JWS). 

https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc7515 , 2015. [11] Simon Josefsson and Ilari Liusvaara. RFC 8032: Edwards-curve digital signature algorithm (EdDSA). https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc8032 , 2017. [12] Vladimir Karpukhin, Barlas Oğuz, Sewon Min, Patrick Lewis, Ledell Wu, Sergey Edunov, Danqi Chen, and Wen-tau Yih. Dense passage retrieval for open-domain question answering. In Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing (EMNLP) , 2020. [13] Graham Klyne and Chris Newman. RFC 3339: Date and time on the Internet: Timestamps. 

https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc3339 , 2002. [14] Patrick Lewis, Ethan Perez, Aleksandra Piktus, Fabio Petroni, Vladimir Karpukhin, Naman Goyal, Heinrich Küttler, Mike Lewis, Wen-tau Yih, Tim Rocktäschel, Sebastian Riedel, and Douwe Kiela. Retrieval-augmented generation for knowledge-intensive NLP tasks. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS) , 2020. 40 [15] Fei Tony Liu, Kai Ming Ting, and Zhi-Hua Zhou. Isolation forest. In IEEE International Conference on Data Mining (ICDM) , 2008. [16] Yury A. Malkov and D. A. Yashunin. Efficient and robust approximate nearest neighbor search using hierarchical navigable small world graphs. IEEE Transactions on Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence , 42(4), 2020. [17] National Institute of Standards and Technology. AI risk management framework (AI RMF 1.0). https://www.nist.gov/itl/ai-risk-management-framework , 2023. [18] Zachary Newman, John Speed Meyers, and Santiago Torres-Arias. sigstore: Software signing for everybody. In ACM Conference on Computer and Communications Security (CCS) , 2022. [19] Open Source Security Foundation. SLSA: Supply-chain levels for software artifacts. https: //slsa.dev/ , 2023. [20] OpenAI. New embedding models and API updates. https://openai.com/index/ new-embedding-models-and-api-updates/ , 2024. Announcement of text-embedding-3-large and related models. [21] Nicolas Papernot, Patrick McDaniel, Ian Goodfellow, Somesh Jha, Z. Berkay Celik, and Ananthram Swami. Practical black-box attacks against machine learning. In ACM Asia Conference on Computer and Communications Security (ASIACCS) , 2017. [22] Fabian Pedregosa, Gaël Varoquaux, Alexandre Gramfort, Vincent Michel, Bertrand Thirion, Olivier Grisel, Mathieu Blondel, et al. Scikit-learn: Machine learning in Python. Journal of Machine Learning Research , 12, 2011. [23] Niels Provos and Peter Honeyman. Hide and seek: An introduction to steganography. IEEE Security & Privacy , 1(3), 2003. [24] Qdrant Team. Qdrant documentation: Vector quantization. https://qdrant.tech/ documentation/guides/quantization/ , 2024. [25] Jim Schaad. RFC 8392: CBOR object signing and encryption (COSE). https://datatracker. ietf.org/doc/html/rfc8392 , 2018. [26] Bernhard Schölkopf, John C. Platt, John Shawe-Taylor, Alex J. Smola, and Robert C. Williamson. Estimating the support of a high-dimensional distribution. Neural Computation ,13(7), 2001. [27] Reza Shokri, Marco Stronati, Congzheng Song, and Vitaly Shmatikov. Membership inference attacks against machine learning models. In IEEE Symposium on Security and Privacy , 2017. [28] Santiago Torres-Arias, Hammad Afzali, Trishank Karthik Kuppusamy, Reza Curtmola, and Justin Cappos. in-toto: Providing farm-to-table guarantees for bits and bytes. In USENIX Security Symposium , 2019. [29] Florian Tramèr, Nicolas Papernot, Ian Goodfellow, Dan Boneh, and Patrick McDaniel. The space of transferable adversarial examples. In arXiv preprint arXiv:1704.03453 , 2017. [30] Jascha Wanger. SchemaPin: Cryptographic provenance for tool schemas. https://github. com/ThirdKeyAI/SchemaPin , 2025. Apache-2.0. 41 [31] Jascha Wanger. Symbiont: Policy-governed agent runtime. https://github.com/ThirdKeyAI/ Symbiont , 2025. Apache-2.0. [32] Jascha Wanger. VectorPin: Verifiable integrity for AI embedding stores. https://github. com/ThirdKeyAI/VectorPin , 2025. Apache-2.0. [33] Jascha Wanger. VectorSmuggle: A research framework for vector-based data exfiltration. 

https://github.com/jaschadub/VectorSmuggle , 2025. Apache-2.0. [34] Andreas Westfeld. F5—a steganographic algorithm: High capacity despite better steganalysis. In Information Hiding (IH ’01) , 2001. [35] Wei Zou, Runpeng Geng, Binghui Wang, and Jinyuan Jia. PoisonedRAG: Knowledge corruption attacks to retrieval-augmented generation of large language models. https://arxiv.org/abs/ 2402.07867 , 2024. 

# A Protocol Specification (v1) 

This appendix is a self-contained reproduction of the VectorPin protocol specification at version 1. A separate-language implementation that follows this appendix should produce signatures and verifications byte-for-byte compatible with the Python and Rust reference implementations [32]. 

## A.1 Goals 

A VectorPin Pin is a compact attestation that travels with an embedding through a vector database. It guarantees that: 

• The embedding matches a specific source text. 

• The embedding was produced by a specific model. 

• The pin was issued by a specific producer. 

• None of the above has changed since issuance. Non-goals: confidentiality, access control, anti-replay across collections. 

## A.2 Cryptographic primitives 

Primitive Algorithm Hash SHA-256 Signature Ed25519 [2] Encoding URL-safe base64, no padding These are fixed for protocol version 1. Future versions MAY introduce alternatives but MUST bump the version field. 

## A.3 Canonical hashes 

Text. hash_text (s) := "sha256:" ∥ hex(SHA256(UTF8(NFC( s)))) .Text MUST be normalized to Unicode NFC before encoding. Implementations MUST reject input that cannot be normalized. 42 Vector. hash_vector (v, dtype ) := "sha256:" ∥ hex(SHA256(canonical _bytes( v, dtype ))) .Where canonical _bytes produces (1) the vector cast to the specified dtype ( f32 or f64 ), (2) stored in little-endian byte order, (3) packed contiguously, 1-D. Other dtypes are reserved for future protocol versions. 

## A.4 Pin format 

A Pin is a JSON object with the fields below. All required fields MUST appear; optional fields MUST be omitted entirely (not written as null ) when not set. 

Field Type Req. Description 

v integer yes Protocol version. Must equal 1. 

model string yes Embedding model identifier. 

model_hash string no Optional content hash of model weights. 

source_hash string yes Hash of source text (Section A.3). 

vec_hash string yes Hash of embedding (Section A.3). 

vec_dtype string yes One of "f32" or "f64" .

vec_dim integer yes Embedding dimensionality. 

ts string yes RFC 3339 [13] / ISO 8601 UTC timestamp, e.g. 2026-05-05T12:00:00Z .

extra object no String-to-string map of producer-defined fields. 

kid string yes Identifier of the signing key. 

sig string yes Ed25519 signature, URL-safe base64, no padding. 

Example. 

> {"v": 1, "model": "text-embedding-3-large", "source_hash": "sha256:9f86d081884c7d659a2feaa0c55ad015a3bf4f1b2b0b822cd15d6c15b0f00a08", "vec_hash": "sha256:0123...", "vec_dtype": "f32", "vec_dim": 3072, "ts": "2026-05-05T12:00:00Z", "kid": "prod-2026-05", "sig": "MEUCIQD..." }

## A.5 Canonicalization for signing 

The signature in sig is produced over a canonical byte sequence that excludes kid and sig themselves. The canonical form is JSON with all keys sorted lexicographically, no whitespace (separators "," 

and ":" ), UTF-8 encoded, with extra also key-sorted if present, and with model_hash and extra 

omitted entirely when not set. This canonical form is fed directly into Ed25519 signing. 

## A.6 Verification 

A verifier MUST: 1. Reject pins whose v field is unknown to it ( UNSUPPORTED_VERSION ). 2. Reject pins whose kid is not in its key registry ( UNKNOWN_KEY ). 3. Reconstruct the canonical byte sequence and verify sig against the registered public key for kid 

(SIGNATURE_INVALID on failure). 43 4. If ground-truth source was supplied, recompute hash_text(source) and compare to source_-hash (SOURCE_MISMATCH on mismatch). 5. If a ground-truth vector was supplied, recompute hash_vector(vector, vec_dtype) and com-pare to vec_hash ; also check the supplied vector’s shape matches vec_dim (VECTOR_TAMPERED 

or SHAPE_MISMATCH on mismatch). 6. If an expected model identifier was supplied, compare to model (MODEL_MISMATCH on mismatch). Verifiers MUST distinguish at least these failure modes. Other implementations MAY use different identifiers for the modes but MUST distinguish the cases. 

## A.7 Storage conventions 

Adapter implementations SHOULD store pins under the metadata key vectorpin . Backends without free-form metadata fields are out of scope for this version of the protocol — provenance must travel with the data. 

## A.8 Key rotation 

Verifiers MUST support multiple kid -to-public-key mappings simultaneously. Issuers rotate by (1) generating a new keypair with a fresh kid , (2) adding the new public key to all relevant verifier registries, (3) switching production signing to the new private key, (4) optionally re-pinning the corpus over time, (5) removing the old public key from registries once re-pinning is complete or the rotation policy expires. Old pins continue to verify against the old public key during this window. 

## A.9 Security considerations 

Replay across records. Pins are not bound to a specific record id. An attacker who copies a pin from one record to another can pass verification only if the vector and source they paste alongside match the pin. Implementations that need replay protection SHOULD use the reserved 

vectorpin. -prefixed keys under extra : vectorpin.collection_id , vectorpin.record_id , and 

vectorpin.tenant_id . The vectorpin. prefix is reserved by this specification and MUST NOT be used for any other purpose. Because every extra entry is signed, attackers cannot rewrite these fields without invalidating the signature. 

Time. The ts field is informational. Verifiers MAY reject pins outside an acceptable time window but the protocol does not require it. 

Key custody. An attacker with the private signing key can produce arbitrary pins. Treat the signing key as a high-value secret; use a managed secrets store, time-bounded keys, and rotation. 

Source-time integrity. VectorPin attests to the relationship between source and vector at pin time . It does not attest that the source itself was authentic at ingestion. Upstream content-integrity controls (signed source documents, in-toto attestations on the ingestion pipeline) remain necessary and complementary. 44 A.10 Versioning 

This is protocol version 1. Future versions MAY add new optional fields under extra -style namespaces, add new dtype identifiers, or add new signature/hash algorithms with corresponding identifiers. A change is breaking iff a v1 verifier would silently accept a v2 pin as valid when the v2 pin’s additional semantics matter. Such changes MUST bump the major version. 

# B Reproducibility 

Every figure and table in this paper was produced by code in the VectorSmuggle and VectorPin repositories at fixed commit hashes. To reproduce the empirical study end-to-end: 

> git clone https://github.com/jaschadub/VectorSmuggle git clone https://github.com/ThirdKeyAI/VectorPin cd VectorSmuggle python3 -m venv venv && source venv/bin/activate pip install -r requirements.txt -r requirements-test.txt export OPENAI_API_KEY=sk-... python scripts/empirical_study.py # main 28-point run python scripts/empirical_report.py # generates figures python scripts/preprint_extensions.py # detector + quantization study

Outputs land in results/empirical/<timestamp>/ and results/preprint/<timestamp>/ .Both directories are committed at the timestamps referenced by this paper’s tables and figures. For the protocol-level cross-language fixtures used by the Rust reimplementation: 

> cd VectorPin python scripts/generate_test_vectors.py # writes testvectors/v1.json cd rust && cargo test --workspace # consumes the fixtures

A drift-detection workflow in .github/workflows/ci.yml regenerates the fixtures on every Python-side change and fails CI if the regenerated bytes differ from what is committed, preventing silent compatibility breakage. 

# C Detector Hyperparameters 

The detection results in Section 5.3 use the following sklearn configurations, with no hyperparameter tuning beyond the library defaults: 

> from sklearn.ensemble import IsolationForest from sklearn.svm import OneClassSVM iforest = IsolationForest( n_estimators=200, contamination=0.05, random_state=42, n_jobs=-1, )ocsvm = OneClassSVM( kernel="rbf", nu=0.05, gamma="scale", )

45 The training set was a uniformly sampled 27-vector split from the 68-vector embedding matrix; the test split (41 clean vectors plus their per-technique obfuscated counterparts) was held out. 

On the small training set. 27 vectors is small as detector training data — production deploy-ments would fit on 10 4–10 6 clean baseline embeddings with proportionally tighter score distributions and correspondingly more reliable AUC measurements. Our sample-corpus size is the limiting factor and is acknowledged in Section 9. We report the small-fit numbers because they are the conservative case: if the detector wins at N = 27 , it wins by a wider margin at production scale. 

# D Threat Models B and C: Extended Analysis 

Section 3 defines three adversary tiers and Section 7.4 discusses the two we do not empirically validate. This appendix extends those discussions for readers who care about the formal bandwidth analysis. 

## B: Compromised vector-DB credentials 

The attacker has read access to vectors and pins but no ingestion-pipeline access. They can therefore: 

• Read ⟨vi, pin i⟩ pairs. 

• Issue similarity queries against the corpus. 

• Not plant new pins or modify existing ones (no signing key). Their exfiltration paths are direct: dump the corpus. Steganographic perturbation does not help under this model because the attacker cannot perturb in the first place. The only remaining role for steganography in model B is pre-existing attestations — if some prior phase planted steganographic content (collusion with an earlier insider), the attacker recovers payload by reading. The protocol does not pretend to defend against this; pre-pinning collusion is an upstream ingestion-integrity problem, not an embedding-store problem. 

## C: Query-only 

The attacker can issue similarity-search queries and observe ranked results. The information channel is the rank order of returned documents. For each query the attacker chooses, the response is one of (Nk 

> )

possible top-k sets, where N is the corpus size and k is the result-set size. The maximum information per query is log 2 

> (Nk
> )

bits, which for N = 10 6 and k = 10 is approximately 196 bits. In practice the attacker recovers far less because queries that disambiguate small subsets are bandwidth-inefficient and the defender’s query-rate limits cap the attack rate. By contrast, direct vector access (model A or B) yields d · 32 bits per vector for d-dimensional float32 embeddings — 98 ,304 bits per vector at d = 3072 . The bandwidth ratio between vector-access and query-only is roughly 10 3, enough that any technique studied in this paper is qualitatively the wrong shape of attack under model C. Different threat-model-C techniques (membership inference, training-data extraction via crafted queries) exist and are an active research area, but they are not steganographic exfiltration in the sense of this paper. 46 E Negative Results 

Three observations from the empirical study that did not lead to positive headlines but are worth recording so subsequent work does not re-discover them. 

Combined techniques do not stack stealth. The intuition that combining several small per-turbations would yield a less-detectable composite was not confirmed by our results. The combined “all” technique — noise then rotation then scaling then offset — inherits the most-detectable compo-nent’s signature rather than averaging across them. Off-the-shelf density-based detectors (Isolation Forest, One-Class SVM) fit a single density model over the embedding distribution, and whichever sub-technique pushes a sample furthest off-density dominates the score. Composing techniques adds attack complexity (more recovery metadata, more failure modes) without proportional defensive evasion. We expect this finding to generalize, though we have not proven it formally. 

Per-vector quantization is a different beast. Section 5.4 reports per-dimension scalar int8 quantization, the Qdrant default, under which all studied techniques’ fidelity survives. We also experimented with per-vector quantization (each vector receives its own scale-and-shift before int8 encoding) which is more aggressive and does destroy direction-preserving techniques like rotation and scaling. We omit those numbers from the main results because per-vector quantization is not the production default for general-purpose vector stores; reporting them would overstate the role of quantization as a defense in deployed systems. 

Recovery cosine for noise techniques is not a recovery metric. A subtle methodological point: the recovery-cosine column in Table 4 reports 1.000 for rotation and scaling because those transformations are exactly invertible from metadata, but reports –- for noise injection. A naive implementation might compute “recovery” for noise as cos (v, v + n) where n is the same noise vector, which is trivially the obfuscated cosine and not a meaningful recovery measurement. We avoided this trap and report only invertible techniques’ recovery cosine, but a follow-up paper trying to quantify noise-channel capacity will need to define what “recovery” means for irreversible perturbations more carefully than we did here. 47