Title: Paper Title (use style: paper title)

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2609.29930v1

Published Time: Fri, 25 Sep 2026 01:22:54 GMT

Number of Pages: 7

Markdown Content:
EndoFSA:  Endoscopic Few -Shot  Image  Generation 

# via  Rank -Constrained  Parameter  Adaptation 

Panagiota Gatoula 

Dept. of Computer  Science and 

Biomedical Informatics 

University of Thessaly 

Lamia, Greece 

pgatoula@uth.gr 

Grigoris Karypidis 

Dept. of Computer Science and 

Biomedical Informatics 

University of Thessaly 

Lamia, Greece 

grkarypidis@uth.gr 

Dimitris K. Iakovidis 

Dept. of Computer Science and 

Biomedical Informatics 

University of Thessaly 

Lamia, Greece 

diakovidis@uth.gr 

Abstract —Wireless Capsule Endoscopy  produces large -scale 

gastrointestinal image data, yet pathological  findings  remain 

significantly underrepresented , lim iting the generalization 

performance  of deep -learning based abnormality detection 

systems.  Synthetic data generation  methods  offer  a practical 

solution to mitigate this  imbalance . However,  their  training 

directly on scarce abnormal samples  often results  in  instability, 

overfitting and structural distortions. Addressing these 

challenges  requires controlled adaptation mechanisms that 

preserve anatomical priors , while enabling realistic pathological 

variation. This paper presents  EndoFSA,  a GAN -based  model 

for  Endoscopic Few -Shot image generation by Adaptation  in 

WCE imaging.  EndoFSA  leverages  a generator  pretrained on 

abundant normal data and adapts it to abnormal domains  using 

limited number of training  samples through  a rank -constrained 

parameter adaptation , where only a small number  of 

modulation parameters is updated while the  pretrained weights 

remain frozen . By restri cti ng parameter updates  to  a low 

dimensional subspace  and incorporating perceptual boundary 

regularization and cluster -wise diversity control , EndoFSA 

enables  efficient  model  adaptation  under limited data conditions 

and  mitigates mode collapse,  while  preserving  the anatomical 

priors learned from normal data . Importantly,  EndoFSA 

operates without requiring  pixel -level annotations, masks or 

bounding box supervision . Evaluation on publicly available 

WCE  benchmark datasets  spanning  various  abnormal 

categories  demonstrate s that  EndoFSA  generates abnormal 

images reproducing real lesions  morphology . Moreover,  in a 

downstream classification task,  training an image classifier 

solely on  synthetic  abnormal  images generated by EndoFSA 

yiel ds  performance  comparable  to  that  obtained with  rea l

images . These findings highlight the effectiveness of few -shot 

adaptation  based on rank -constrained parameter  updates  for 

abnormal WCE image synthesis under  scarce  data  conditions .

Keywords — Wireless  Capsule  Endoscopy , Few -shot  Image 

Generation,  Generative Adversarial  Networks , Rank -Constrained 

Parameter  Update , Model Adaptation .

I.  INTRODUCTION 

Gastrointestinal tract  diseases  are a leading cause of 

morbidity and mortality , often requiring early detection of 

pathological conditions such as inflammation , vascular 

lesions  and  polypoid  growth  for their effective treatment  [1] .

Wireless Capsule Endoscopy (WCE)  [2]  provides a non -

invasive  means of  visualiz ing  the entire GI tract, capturing 

videos  comprising  thousands of frames  per patient.  Although 

this prospect  offers comprehensive  inspection , manual review 

of the  GI  record ings  remains  a time -consuming process , often 

requiring  more than  60 minutes per  examination  and is still 

susceptible to human error  even  among  experienced 

clinicians. 

Deep  learning  image -based Clinical Decision Support 

Systems  (CDSSs)  have  shown  significant  potential in 

automatic detection of abnormalities in WCE imag ing  [3], [4] .

However, their performance strongly depends on the 

availability , diversity  and  representativeness  of  the  training 

data  used  for  deep learning . Furthermore,  for  the research 

community  to improve  the performance of such  CDSS s, it  is 

re quire d that  training  data  be  annotated by experts and 

publicly released  for benchmarking.  Today  such  WCE 

datasets  are limited , often  imbalanced , vary in size  or lack 

sufficient representation  of  abnormality  categories  [5] . This 

data  scarcity  limits  the generalization of  CDSS s, renders 

abnormality detection  a challenging task  and  constitutes a 

barrier in the progress  in this domain .

Traditional image augmentation  techniques , such as 

rotation, translation or  scaling , could be considered as a 

mitigation measure; however, they usually  provide  only 

marginal  improvements  in the performance of CDSS , as they 

cannot introduce new pathological  patterns  [6] . Generative 

Adversarial Networks (GANs)  [7]  offer a promising 

alternative  in this aspect  by synthesizing realistic abnormal 

images to  enrich  the representation  of the existing datasets. In 

the  non -medical  image  domain, GANs have demonstrated 

remarkable performance  for high quality image synthesis, 

with efficient generation  of new unseen data from noise , in a 

single step  [8] . However, in the context of WCE, where 

abnormal data  are  scarce  compared  to  the  normal  ones ,

training  GANs  directly  on limited abnormal samples  is prone 

to instability, mode collapse and  generation of unrealistic 

artifacts  [6] . Most  current  WCE  image  synthesis  approaches 

based on GANs  either  assume sufficient abnormal data 

availability  [9], [10] , or focus on specific lesion types  [11] .

Therefore,  few -shot  abnormal image  generation  across 

diverse categories remains  relatively  under explored .

To  address this  limitation , this paper p resents  Endoscopic Few-Shot image genration by Adaptation ( EndoFSA  a GAN -

based framework  for few -shot abnormal image  generation  .

EndoFSA  leverages  a GAN model  [8]  pretrained on abundant 

normal  images , and  is capable of adapting  to  the abnormal 

image domain , using  only a limited number of abnormal 

samples . To this end , EndoFSA  generate s abnormal images  by 

using rank -constrained  parameter  adaptation  [12] , where only 

a small set of parameters is updat ed . Unlike  the conventional 

This work is part of the European project SEARCH, which is supported 

by the Innovative Health Initiative Joint Undertaking (IHI JU) under grant 

agreement No. 101172997. The JU receives support from the European 

Union’s Horizon Europe research and innovation programme  and COCIR, 

EFPIA, Europa Bio, MedTech Europe, Vaccines Europe, Medical Values 

GmbH, Corsano Health BV, Syntheticus AG, Maggioli SpA, Motilent Ltd, 

Ubitech Ltd, Hemex Benelux, Hellenic Healthcare Group, German 

Oncology Center, Byte Solutions Unlimited, Ada ptIT GmbH. Views and 

opinions expressed are however those of the author(s) only and do not 

necessarily reflect those of the aforementioned parties. Neither of the 

aforementioned parties can be held responsible for them. 

This work is part of the European project SEARCH, which is supported 

by the Innovative Health Initiative Joint Undertaking (IHI JU) under grant 

agreement No. 101172997. The JU receives support from the European 

Union’s Horizon Europe research and innovation programme  and COCIR, 

EFPIA, Europa Bio, MedTech Europe, Vaccines Europe, Medical Values 

GmbH, Corsano Health BV, Syntheticus AG, Maggioli SpA, Motilent Ltd, 

Ubitech Ltd, Hemex Benelux, Hellenic Healthcare Group, German 

Oncology Center, Byte Solutions Unlimited, Ada ptIT GmbH. Views and 

opinions expressed are however those of the author(s) only and do not 

necessarily reflect those of the aforementioned parties. Neither of the 

aforementioned parties can be held responsible for them. 

© 2026 IEEE. Personal use of this material is permitted. Permission from IEEE must be obtained for all other uses, in any cur rent or future media, including 

reprinting/republishing this material for advertising or promotional purposes, creating new collect ive works, for resale or redistribution to servers or lists, or 

reuse of any copyrighted component of this work in other works.  This is a preprint of a paper presented at the 39th IEEE International Symposium on 

Computer -Based Medical Systems (CBMS 2026), June 2026. fine -tuning  strategies , where all the model  parameters are 

optimized , the proposed adaptation strategy  constrains 

parameter updates to a low -dimensional subspace. This 

approach prevents  overfitting  or  distortion of the previously 

learned  anatomical  structures  in case s where  the  available 

training samples  are limited  [13] , and  enables stable 

adaptation  to the abnormal domain,  while preserving the 

structural consistency and anatomical priors learned from 

normal  data . More i mportantly , the proposed strategy  does not 

require  strong  supervision , e.g. , us age of  pixel -level 

annotations , masks or bounding boxes indicating abnormal 

region s. Moreover, to  further enhanc e the quality of the 

synthesis,  EndoFSA  incorporates perceptual boundary 

regularization and cluster -wise diversity control  [12] . These 

mechanisms encourage the generation of realistic pathological 

patterns while preventing mode collapse and maintaining 

intra -class variation, even under extreme few -shot conditions. 

In summary,  contributions of this study  include :

• A GAN -based  few -shot  model  for  the generation of 

abnormal  WCE  image s of  various  categories , based  on 

the adaptation  from  normal to abnormal data. 

• A rank -constrained  model  adaptation  strategy  that 

enabl es  stable abnormal generation under severe data 

scarcity , while preserving anatomical structure s and 

without requiring  strong supervision .

• A comprehensive  evaluation  demonstrates  the utility 

of  the generated images  in  downstream classification 

tasks,  alongside quantitative and qualitative 

assessment of  fidelity  and diversity. 

The rest of this paper is structured in  four  sections . Section 

II provides  an outline of  few -shot image generation strategies 

with a pplication  focus on WCE . Section II I details  the 

EndoFSA  framework . Section  IV describes  the experimental 

setup and reports the  results obtained , and  the  last section 

summarizes the conclusions  derived and  draws future research 

directions. 

II.  RELATED  WORK 

A.  Few -shot image generation 

Few -shot image synthesis  ha s been  widely studied  in 

various imaging domains, including medical modalities 

mainly  focus ing  on  dermatoscop y images . Regarding non -

medical image synthesis tasks , GAN -based  models  such as 

Skip Attention  GAN  (SAGAN ) [14]  and ProtoGAN  [15]  have 

been propose d to  preserv e structural details  under limited 

training data, using  attention  mechanism s or prototype -based 

feature learning strategies , respectively.  In the medical 

imaging domain,  dataset limitations  render  few -shot 

generation a  more challenging  task . Thus, only a limited number of studies have been investigated few-shot generation schemes. Recently, MedGAN [16] presented  an adaptive 

altering training strategy  based on  Wasserstein loss  to 

generate  dermato logical skin lesions . Nevertheless , the 

proposed method required a moderate number  of data  per 

class .

B.  Endoscopic Image Synthesis 

The generation of endoscopic images has  proved  a

challenging task. This is because  gastrointestinal tract 

exhibits  variation  in  textures, illumination , reflections,  and 

appearance of  pathological  findings.  Previous  studies  [9], 

[10], [17]  applied  common  GAN architectures  like  [8]  to 

augment  real  endoscopic datasets  of flexible  and WCE 

imaging modalities,  aiming to improve CD SS classification 

performance. However , these architectures, originally 

developed for non -medical image synthesis , assume 

abundant  availability of  training images . Thereby, their 

applicability under data  constrained  settings  li mits their 

generation performance.  Regarding WCE  imaging, the study 

of  [11]  presented Sin -GAN -Seg pipeline. An adversarial 

framework  trained with single images that was  focusing on 

polyp lesion s. However, the proposed approach relied on per -

pixel  lesion annotations.  In the context of  GAN -based 

endoscopic image  generation  under limited data , the 

approach presented in  [18]  leverag es  a fine -tuned Image 

Inpainting GAN to synthesize  endoscopic  lesions within 

specified regions of real  WCE  images . However,  the 

proposed framework  relies on  predefined lesion loca tion s

which  limits its ability to replicate detailed and various 

disease alterations . Although  previous studies have 

investigated WCE image  synthesis  of abnormal conditions in 

limited data  settings  [5], [6] , these approaches were focused 

on  alternative generative models  such as  variationa l

autoencoders, aiming  to  counterbalance  GAN  training 

stability issues  that occur  with  limited  training  data. 

Therefore,  few -shot image generation of  WCE images 

containing abnormal findings has yet to be  thoroughly 

investigated. 

III.  METHODOLOGY 

This section presents the proposed few -shot  image 

synthesis  framework , namely  EndoFSA (Endoscopic Few-Shot image genration by Adaptation) , for  generating WCE 

image s of  various  pathological cases.  An overview of the 

proposed model is illustrated  in Fig . 1.  Let  𝒟 normal  =

{𝑥 𝑖 normal } 𝑖 =1 

> 𝑁

denote a set of normal images and  𝒟 ab normal  =

{𝑥 𝑗  ab normal } 𝑗 =1 

> 𝐾

denote a set of abnormal images , where  𝐾  ≪

𝑁 . The objective is to synthesize abnormal images that capture 

clinically relevant  pathological characteristics , while 

preserving the  appearance  distribution of real abnormal 

images under data scarcity. The proposed fram ewo rk

leverages  a GAN  model  pretrained on  𝒟 normal  and  employs 

constrained  few -shot  adapta ti on  on  𝒟 abn ormal  through  low -

rank  weight  modulation . Additionally,  perceptual  boundary 

regularization  and cluster -wise  diversity  control  strategies  are        

> Fig. 1. Overview of the proposed model for few -shot WCE image synthesis of
> various pathological conditions .

employed  in the  feature  space  aiming  to  preserve the 

anatomical prior s learned from  𝒟 normal  , while enabling stable 

adaptation to abnormal data distributions  without requiring 

pixel -level  annotations . The methodological co mponents of 

EndoFSA  model are detail ed below .

A.  Pretrained  synthetic data generation model 

The  EndoFSA  model  adopts  StyleGAN v2 [8]  as a

generative backbone. StyleGAN v2 is a style -based GAN 

architecture original proposed  for  natural image synthesis  that 

has  been  extensively  adopted  for  medical image generation 

tasks.  It s architecture  progressive ly  transform s noise into 

high -resolution  synthetic images, through learned modulation 

of convolutional features in an intermediate latent space. Let 

𝓏  ∼ 𝒩 (0, 𝑰 ) denote a latent vector sampled from a Gaussian 

prior  distribution. A mapping network  ℳ: 𝒵  → 𝒲  ,

composed of  fully connected  layers , projects  𝓏  into an 

intermediate latent representation  𝑤  defined as :

𝑤  = ℳ(𝓏 ), 𝑤  𝜖  𝒲  ()

The generator network  𝐺 𝜗  parametrized by  𝜗  ,

progressively transforms  𝑤  into an image through a hierarchy 

of convolutional layers with style -based modulation. For a 

convolutional layer  ℓ its  weight tensor kernel  is defined as :

𝒲 (ℓ) 𝜖  ℝ𝐶 𝑜𝑢𝑡  × 𝐶 𝑖𝑛  × 𝑘  × 𝑘  ()

where  𝐶 𝑜𝑢𝑡  and  𝐶 𝑖𝑛  represent the number of output and input channels corresponding to layer  ℓ, and  𝑘  represents the kernel size. 

A learned affine transformation  𝑠 (ℓ) = 𝐴 (ℓ)(𝒲 ) produces 

channel -wise style coefficients  𝑠 (ℓ) 𝜖  ℝ 𝐶 𝑖𝑛  . The 

convolutional weights are modulated  by scaling  each input 

channel  according to the corresponding style coefficient  as 

follows: 

𝒲 ̅ (ℓ) 𝑖 ,𝑗 ,𝑘  = 𝑠 𝑗  (ℓ) 𝒲 (ℓ) 𝑖 ,𝑗 ,𝑘  ()

where  𝑖  and  j are the  ind ic es  of the  output  and input  channels 

respectively . For  prevent ing  signal amplification  and ensure 

variance normalization across channels,  weight demodulation 

is applied. The demodulated weights  are computed as  follows :

𝒲 ̂ (ℓ) 𝑖 ,𝑗 ,𝑘  = 𝛾 𝑖 (ℓ) 𝒲 ̅ (ℓ)𝑖 ,𝑗 ,𝑘  ()

where  𝛾 𝑖 (ℓ) represents a  demodulation factor for each output 

channel  given by :

𝛾 𝑖 (ℓ) = (∑ (𝑠 𝑗  (ℓ) 𝒲 (ℓ)𝑖 ,𝑗 ,𝑘  )2 + 𝜀 𝑗 ,𝑘  )− 1 

> 2

()

In (5)  constant  𝜀  > 0 is used  for  numerical stability.  This 

modulation -demodulation mechanism decouples style control 

from feature magnitude, enabling stable  training  and fine -

grained control of image attributes  such as textural patterns 

[8] . In addition, stochastic  channel -wise noise injection  is 

applied  at each resolution level,  to introduce micro -structural 

variability and enhance synthesis realism . The discriminator 

network  𝐷 𝜙  , parametrized by  𝜙  , follows a hierarchical 

convolutional architecture symmetric to  the generator ,

progressively downsampl ing  the input image and producing a 

scalar realism score . The adversarial objective is  formulated 

as follows: 

ℒ𝑎𝑑𝑣  (𝐺 𝜗 , 𝐷 𝜙 ) = 𝔼 𝓍 ~𝑝 (𝑥 )𝑟𝑒𝑎𝑙  [log  𝐷 𝜙 (𝑥 )] +

𝔼 𝓏 ∼𝒩 (0,𝑰 )[log (1 − 𝐷 𝜙  (𝐺 𝜗 (𝓏 )))] ()

where  𝔼  represents the expected value , and  𝑝 (𝑥 )𝑟𝑒𝑎𝑙 

represents the real data distribution. 

The proposed  EndoFSA  model utilizes a pretrained 

instance of StyleGAN v2  model on  𝒟 normal  , thereby  encod ing 

typical WCE visual  patterns, including anatomical structure, 

mucosal texture, and illumination statistics. This pretrained 

prior  facilitates  stable  few -shot adaptation  to abnormal cases .

B.  Low -rank  weight  modulation for  few -shot  adaptation 

Direct fine tuning of a generator  𝐺 𝜗  pretrained on the normal image subset  𝒟 normal , using an abnormal image subset 

𝒟 ab normal , where  𝐾 ≪ 𝑁,  typically leads to rapid overfitting and degradation of previously learned anatomical structures. Aiming to mitigate this issue, in line with [12], the pretrained parameters of  𝐺 𝜗  are kept frozen and adaptation is performed through a rank-constrained parameter adaptation mechanism. This significantly reduces the number of trainable parameters while preserving the anatomical knowledge encoded in the pretrained model.  The adapted weight  tensor  𝒲̃  (either  for  a

convolutional or a fully connected layer ) is defined as: 

𝒲 ̃ = 𝒲 0 ⊙ 𝛥𝑆  + 𝛥𝛣  ()

where,  𝒲 0 denotes  the  frozen weight parameters (either from 

a convolutional or a fully connected layer),  𝛥𝑆  represents 

scale perturbation s,  𝛥𝛣  represents shift perturbation s and  ⊙

denotes Hadamard dot product.  The term  ΔS enables the scale 

modulation controlling the magnitude of the pretrained 

weights, and the term  ΔΒ  enables the shift modulation 

allowing adaptation to the abnormal domain.  Following  [12] ,

both  ΔS and  ΔΒ  are parametrized  using  rank -one  matrices .

This formulation allows modulation of  the pretrained weights 

using  a minimal number of trainable parameters .

Specifically, for a convolutional layer with weight kernel 

𝒲 0 𝜖 ℝ 𝐶 𝑜𝑢𝑡 × 𝐶 𝑖𝑛 × 𝑘 × 𝑘  , the pretrained weight tensor  𝒲 0 is reshaped into  𝒲 0 𝜖 ℝ 𝐶 𝑜𝑢𝑡 × (𝐶 𝑖𝑛 𝑘 2) , and the modulation terms 

ΔS and ΔΒ are parametrized as matrices of rank one as: 

𝛥 𝑆  = 𝑢 𝑆  𝑣 𝑆  𝑇  ()

𝛥 𝐵  = 𝑢 𝐵  𝑣 𝐵 𝑇  ()

where , 𝑢 𝑆  , 𝑢 𝐵  𝜖  ℝ 𝐶 𝑜𝑢𝑡  and  𝑣 𝑆  , 𝑣 𝐵  𝜖  ℝ 𝐶 𝑖𝑛  𝑘 2

. Consequently, 

the number of trainable parameters is reduced from 

𝐶 𝑜𝑢𝑡  × 𝐶 𝑖𝑛  × 𝑘 2 to  𝐶 𝑜𝑢𝑡  + 𝐶 𝑖𝑛  𝑘 2 for each of the modulation 

terms.  Similarly,  for a  fully connected layer with  a pretrained 

weight matri x 𝒲 0 𝐹𝐶  𝜖  ℝ𝑑 𝑜𝑢𝑡  × 𝑑 𝑖𝑛  , the  corresponding  ΔS and 

ΔΒ  are  defined according to  :

𝛥 𝑆  = 𝑢 𝑆 𝑓𝑐  𝑣 𝑆 𝑓𝑐  

> 𝑇

()

𝛥 𝐵  = 𝑢 𝐵 𝑓𝑐  𝑣 𝐵 𝑓𝑐  

> 𝑇

()

where  𝑢 𝑆 𝑓𝑐  , 𝑢 𝐵 𝑓𝑐  𝜖  ℝ 𝑑 𝑜𝑢𝑡  and  𝑣 𝑆 𝑓𝑐 , 𝑣 𝐵 𝑓𝑐  𝜖  ℝ 𝑑 𝑖𝑛  . In this case, 

the number of trainable parameters  is reduced from  𝑑 𝑜𝑢𝑡 ×𝑑 𝑖𝑛  to  𝑑 𝑜𝑢𝑡 + 𝑑 𝑖𝑛  per modulation term.  The adaptation 

objective remains adversarial: 

ℒ𝑎𝑑𝑝  (𝐺 𝜗 ̃ , 𝐷 𝜓 ) = ℒ𝑎𝑑𝑣  (𝐺 𝜗 ̃ , 𝐷 𝜓 ) ()

where  𝐷 𝜓  represents a discriminator instance trained from 

scratch, and  𝐺 𝜗 ̃ represents the generator with the adapted (modulated) weights .

Let  𝜗 0 denote frozen parameters  𝐺 𝜗  pretrained  on  𝒟 normal 

subset and  let  𝜑  denote the collection of all  rank -one 

adaptation  parameters  express ed  as: 𝜑  = { 𝑢 𝑆  , 𝑣 𝑆  , 𝑢 𝐵  , 𝑣 𝐵  , 𝑢 𝑆 𝑓𝑐  , 𝑣 𝑆 𝑓𝑐  , 𝑢 𝐵 𝑓𝑐  , 𝑣 𝐵 𝑓𝑐  } ()

The adapted  generator is parametrized as  𝐺 𝜗 0,𝜑  . Few -shot 

adaptation on  𝒟 ab normal  subset  is formulated as :

min  

> 𝜑

max  

> 𝜓

ℒ𝑎𝑑𝑣  (𝐺 𝜗 0,𝜑  , 𝐷 𝜓 ) ()

subject to :

∇𝜗 0 ℒ𝑎𝑑𝑣  = 0 ()

Therefore, only the rank -constrained parameters  𝜑  are 

updated, while the pretrained model parameters  𝜗 0 remain 

fixed.  This ensures preservation of anatomical representations 

learned from  𝒟 normal , while enabling stable adaptation to 

abnormal cases under limited supervision. 

C.  Perceptual  boundary  regularization  and  cluster -wise 

diversity control 

Few -shot adaptation under  extreme  sample scarcity 

(where  𝐾  ≪ 𝑁 ), introduces the risk s of perceptual drift  and 

memoriz ation  of  the  few  abnormal examples  by the model .

To preserve perceptual consistency, while allowing 

controlled deviation from the pretrained data manifold  of 

𝒟 normal  , a bounded perceptual constrain t is imposed in  a

semantic  feature space  [12] . This  constraint  preserves  the 

anatomical structures learned  during the generator 

pretraining  on  𝒟 normal  , while  allowing  the synthesis of 

plausible  abnormal pa tterns  during adaptation . Let  𝛷 (∙)

denote a pretrained perceptual embedding network , such as 

InceptionV3  [19] . For a synthetic data sample  𝑥  ̃  = 𝐺 𝜗 0,𝜑  (𝓏 )

and a real abnormal image  𝑥  drawn from  𝒟 ab normal  , the 

perceptual discrepancy is defined according to :

𝑑 𝜑  (𝑥 , 𝑥  ̃  ) = ‖𝛷 (𝑥 ) − 𝛷 (𝑥  ̃  )‖2 ()

where  ‖∙‖2 denotes  𝐿 2 norm. 

Instead of enforcing strict perceptual matching, a

boundary -aware constrained is introduced  as follows: 

ℒ𝑝𝑒𝑟  (𝐺 𝜗 ̃ , 𝐷 𝜙 ) = 𝔼 𝑥 ,𝑧 [max (0, 𝑑 𝜑  (𝑥 , 𝑥  ̃  ) − 𝜏 )] ()

where  𝜏  > 0  defines an admissible perceptual deviation 

radius.  This formulation  operates as a regulariz ing  term  rather 

than a reconstruction objective . Only deviations exceeding 

the radius  𝜏  are penalized, thereby preserving  anatomical 

plausibility , while preventing excessive drift  from the  prior 

domain knowledge  learned  from  𝒟 normal  , under few -shot 

conditions  [12] .

Furthermore, few -shot adversarial adaptation is 

particularly prone to mode collapse due to the limited 

𝒟 ab normal  samples . Thus, to  encourage diversity while 

preserving  intra -class variability  of  𝒟 ab normal , a cluster -wise 

mode -seeking constraint  is also considered  [12] . This 

constraint  promote s the generation of diverse images  for  each 

abnormal pattern , whereas  avoiding changes to  unrelated 

anatomical  structures . Let the  𝒟 ab normal  dataset be partitioned 

into  𝐶  clusters , employing  k-means algorithm  in a perceptual 

feature space  defined by  a pretrained network  Φ(∙), such as  a

VGG network  [20] . Feature vectors  Φ(𝑥 ) are extracted for 

eac h sample  𝑥  ∼ 𝒟 abnormal  . Then  clustering  in  𝐶  groups  is 

performed  in the  feature space  yielding :

𝒟 𝑎𝑏𝑛𝑜𝑟𝑚𝑎𝑙  = ⋃ 𝒟 c 

> 𝐶
> 𝑐 =1

()

where each  𝒟 c subset represents a  cluster  of perceptually 

similar  real  abnormal  samples . Clustering  groups  the 

perceptua lly similar abnormal  samples  and  enables  diversity 

control  within  each  abnormal pattern , while  ensuring 

sufficient samples per cluster under the few -shot setting  [12] .

A pair of  latent  input  codes  (𝓏 𝑖 

> (1)

, 𝓏 𝑖 

> (2)

) is  sampled  from 

𝒩 (0, 𝑰 ) and  the images generated from  𝐺 𝜗 0,𝜑  are assigned to 

the closest cluster.  Within each cluster d iversity is enforced 

by measuring  distances  of latent -, feature -, and image -space 

representations with respect to  changes  between  𝓏 𝑖  

> (1)

and 

𝓏 𝑖 

> (2)

, respectively  denoted  as  𝑑 𝑤 ,𝑖 , 𝑑 𝐹 ,𝑖 , 𝑑 I,𝑖 , and  defined  in 

(19 )-(2 1):

𝑑 𝑤 ,𝑖  = ‖𝑤 𝑖   

> (1)−𝑤 𝑖
> (2)‖1
> ‖𝓏 𝑖
> (1)−𝓏 𝑖
> (2)‖1

()

where  ‖∙‖1 denotes the  𝐿 1 norm , and  𝑤 𝑖  

> (1)

and  𝑤 𝑖 

> (2)

represent the respective intermediate latent representations 

defined in (1) ;

𝑑 𝐹 ,𝑖  = 1 

> 𝐿

∑ ‖𝐹 𝑙  (𝑤 𝑖    

> (1))−𝐹 𝑙 (𝑤 𝑖
> (2))‖1
> ‖𝑤 𝑖
> (1)−𝑤 𝑖
> (2)‖1
> 𝐿
> 𝑙 =1

()

where  𝐿  represents  the number of  convolution layers 

considered in  𝐺 𝜗 0,𝜑 , and  𝐹 𝑙  (𝑤 𝑖 

> (1)

), 𝐹 𝑙  (𝑤 𝑖 

> (2)

) the ir  respective 

feature maps ;

𝑑 𝐼 ,𝑖  = ‖𝐺 𝜗 0,𝜑 (𝓏 𝑖   

> (1))−𝐺 𝜗 0,𝜑 (𝓏 𝑖
> (2))‖1
> ‖𝑤 𝑖
> (1)−𝑤 𝑖
> (2)‖1

()

where  𝐼  = 𝐺 𝜗 0,𝜑  (𝓏 ) represents  an image generated by  𝐺 𝜗 0,𝜑  .

Thus, the cluster -wise  mode  seeking regularization  term  is 

defined as  follows: 

ℒ𝑐𝑚𝑠  = (1 

> 𝐶

∑ ( 𝑑 𝑤 ,𝑖  + 𝑑 𝐹 ,𝑖  + 𝑑 𝐼 ,𝑖 )𝐶  

> 𝑖 =1

)−1

()

Minimization of  ℒ𝑚𝑠  encourages  the generator to 

produce noticeable changes in the  generated  images  for 

different  latent  codes.  This  preven ts  mode collapse while 

preserving  variation within  each  cluster  consisting  of 

perceptual ly  similar  abnormal  samples . Thus,  variability is 

maintained  locally within  each  abnormal  pattern  without 

affecting  unrelated anatomical structures.  Therefore, the 

overall adaptation objective is  formulated  as follows :

min  

> 𝜑

max  

> 𝜓

(ℒ𝑎𝑑𝑣  + 𝜆 𝑝𝑒𝑟 ℒ𝑝𝑒𝑟  + 𝜆 𝑐𝑚𝑠  ℒ𝑐𝑚𝑠  ) ()

where  coefficients  𝜆 𝑝𝑒𝑟  and  𝜆 𝑐𝑚𝑠  balance perceptual 

boundary  regularization , and diversity preservation ,

respectively .

IV.  EXPERIMENTS AND  RESULTS 

A.  Datasets 

The  proposed  EndoFSA  framework was evaluated on two 

publicly available WCE datasets, namely KID2  [21]  and 

Kvasir -Capsule  [22] . The KID2  video datab ase  provides 

WCE  imag es  from  the  gastrointestinal tract  illustrating normal 

conditions  as well as  clinically verified abnormalities 

including  inflammatory, vascular,  and  polypoid findings.  The 

Kvasir -Capsule dataset  contains a large collection of 

annotated WCE frames  depicting  both normal mucosa and a 

wide range of pathological findings, including bleeding, 

ulcers, vascular lesions, and inflammatory  lesions . For our 

experiments, the data  from each dataset  were  divided  into two 

subsets:  a subset  𝒟 normal  = {𝑥 𝑖 normal } 𝑖 =1 

> 𝑁

, containing 

exclusively  images of  normal gastrointestinal mucosa  used  to 

pretrain the generator  model ; and , a subset  𝒟 ab normal  =

{𝑥 𝑗  ab normal } 𝑗 =1 

> 𝐾

, containing  solely  images with  pathological 

gastrointestinal  findings , used for  the  few -shot adaptation.  In 

the case of  the KID2 dataset , subset  𝒟 normal  comprise s images from  normal small bowel mucosa  ( 𝑁  =898 ), and  subset 

𝒟 ab normal  comprise s abnormal  images  (K=574 ) including 

inflammatory  ( 𝑛  =227 ), polypoid  ( 𝑛  =44 ) and vascular 

(𝑛 =303 ) lesions . In the case of  Kvasir -Capsule dataset , subset 

𝒟 normal  comprise s images from  normal  small bowel  mucosa 

(𝑁 =34,338 ), and subset  𝒟 ab normal  comprise s abnormal images 

(K=2,873)  of  angiectasia s (𝑛 =866 ), e rosion  (𝑛 =506 ), u lcer 

(𝑛 =854 ), l ymphangiectasia s (𝑛 =592 ) and p olyp oid lesions 

(𝑛 =55 ).

B.  Experimental Setup 

To simulate  realistic clinical  scarcity of pathological 

findings  (K << N) , few -shot adaptation was performed under 

three  data  regimes . For each abnormal class  in  𝒟 ab normal  , 𝐾  ∈

{10 , 50 , 100 } samples were randomly selected for  Κ-shot 

adaptation  of the generator parameters , while the pretrained 

backbone remain ed  frozen . All images were resized to a fixed 

spatial resolution  of (256×256) pixels  and normalized to the 

range  [−1,1].

Initially , the generator  network  was pretrained on  a 𝒟 normal 

subset , following the experimental settings  proposed  in  [12] .

Subsequently, the pretrained instance of generator model was 

adversarial  adapted  as described in Section III.B , updating 

only the rank -constrained parameters , while keeping all 

pretrained weights fixed.  During adaptation process, the 

discriminator followed the StyleGAN v2 [8]  hierarchical 

architecture  and  it  was trained  jointly with  the generator.  For 

the few -shot adaptation,  training settings proposed in  [12] 

were  applied. Specifically,  the Adam optimizer ( 𝛽 1 =0.0, 𝛽 2 = 0.99 ) with a learning rate of  2 ∙ 10 −3  was used. Training was performed for 3,000 iterations with a batch size of 4. Perceptual boundary regularization and cluster-wise mode-seeking  were applied with weights  𝜆 per = 0.1  and 

𝜆 cms = 1.0 , respectively. All the experiments were performed on a single  NVIDIA  GeForce RTX 3090  Ti  GPU.  The 

abnormal synthetic images produced were evaluated with 

respect to  their  fidelity  and utility as described  in  the following 

sections. 

C.  Results 

1)  Synthetic  image  utility  assessment 

Aiming to assess the utility  of  synthetic  abnormal  images 

generated  by the  EndoFSA , we evaluated their effectiveness 

in a downstream classification task.  Particularly , a CNN 

classifier , was  trained  to distinguish between normal and 

abnormal WCE images under t wo  conditions:  (i)  using  real 

normal and abnormal images and  (ii)  using real  normal 

images and synthetic abnormal images generated by 

EndoFSA , which substituted the respective real abnormal 

images.  The performance of trained classifiers was evaluated 

on  held -out  test  set of  real normal and abnormal images, 

disjoint  from  those  used  for  the  classifier training. 

To this end,  synthetic abnormal images were generated by 

EndoFSA  model  under three few -shot regimes ( 𝐾  =

10 , 50 , 100  ). Classification experiments  were conducted 

separately  for  each regime . A widely adopted  CNN 

architecture , Inc eptionV3  [19]  was  employed for the 

classifier  training.  The CNN was  trained  using the Adam 

optimizer  with a learning rate of  1 ∙ 10 −4 , a batch  size  of  32 

and early stopping to prevent overfitting.  The proportions of 

train, validation and test data splits were 70%, 20% and 10%, 

respectively.  A five -fold cross validation strategy was 

applied  to mitigate potential selection bias.  Considering the 

cluster -wise diversity  constraint, a  VGG network  [20]  was 

used as a feature extractor  Φ, and the number of clusters used 

was  𝐶 =4.  The results obtained are summarized in Table I ,

with bold  indicating  the best result , whereas underline d text 

indicating  the second -best re sult . It c an b e observed that , on 

the  KID dataset,  the  classifiers trained using  synthetic 

abnormal images  generated  by EndoFSA  achieved  a

performance  that is  comparable  to  that of the  classifiers 

trained with  real  images , across all regimes . Notabl y, the 

synthetic abnormal images  generated  by EndoFSA  achieved 

the highest  AUC , which is  93.94±0.74%  for  K=10 , closel y

approaching classification performance  on  real images ,

which  yielded  an  AUC of 95.09±0.98% . It is worth noting 

that 70% of the generated abnormal images  by EndoFSA  had 

a very high similarity  (>80%) , in terms of utility , with the 

respective real abnormal images,  as assessed using the 

recently proposed Interpretable Utility Similarity (IUS) 

measure  [23] . In the case of the  Kvasir -Capsule dataset , the 

highest AUC was  achieved  for  K=100 , resulting in an  AUC 

of  86.62±1.47 %. This AUC was lower than that achieved 

using the respective real abnormal images , which is 

97.17±0.37 %. This lower performance can be attributed  in 

part  to the  presence of subtle  abnormalities  e.g ., angiectasia 

and erosions  included in that dataset , which  usually  tend to 

be  less promi nent .

For  reference , classification results  obtained  using 

synthetic  abnormal  images generated  by  EndoFSA  trained 

without few -shot  constraints  (i.e.,  using the entire  𝒟 ab normal 

subsets ). These are  denoted as  EndoFSA  (full ) in Table II . For 

comparison , the  same  Table includes  results  obtained  using 

synthetic  abnormal  images  generated  from  a conventional 

StyleGANv2 model  [8] , trained  using  the  same  𝒟 ab normal 

subsets . On  KID dataset , EndoFSA ( full ) generates abnormal 

images  exhibiting classification performance  comparable  to 

StyleGANv2  images , with  a marginal  differenc e in terms of 

AUC. On Kvasir -Capsule dataset,  synthetic abnormal images 

from StyleGANv2  yielded higher  AUC  compared to 

EndoFSA ( full ). However, it should  be  highlighted  that 

StyleGANv2 was  trained  following conventional  adversarial 

training , updating all model weights,  whereas  EndoFSA 

follow s a model adaptation  training  approach , where only a 

small  sub set of parameters is trained . Overall, the se  results 

demonstrate that EndoFSA generates images with practical 

utility similar to  that of real images in WCE classification 

tasks, particularly under limited data conditions  i.e.,  using 

100 or fewer samples. 

2)  Quantitative  assessment  of synthetic image quality 

To  further evaluate  synthetic abnormal images generated 

by  EndoFSA , two widely adopted sy nthetic image                            

> TABLE I. DOWNSTREAM CLASSIFICATION PERFORMANCE ON REAL
> DATA USING INCEPTION V3 .
> KID dataset Kvasir -Capsule dataset
> Accuracy AUC Accuracy AUC
> Real Dataset 90.22±0.76 95.09±0.98 91.29±0.54 97.17±0.37
> EndoFSA ( K=10) 87.95±0.75 93.94±0.74 70.59 ±1.96 77.95 ±1.11
> EndoFSA ( K=50) 85.90 ±1.92 91.96 ±1.38 75.93 ±1.53 84.23 ±1.65
> EndoFSA ( K= 100) 86.75 ±1.21 92.56 ±0.86 77.85±2.71 86.62±1.47

assessment  measures, namely  Fréchet inception distance 

(FID)  [24]  and  Learned Perceptual Image Patch Similarity 

(LPIPS)  [25]  were calculated.  FID quantifies  how realistic 

synthetic  abnormal images  appear  with respect to  real 

abnormal images . Lower FID  scores indicate  that the 

synthetic abnormal images generated by  EndoFSA , better 

represent real  image  characteristics. LPIPS  evaluates  the 

diversity  between  randomly selected  synthetic  image  pair s, 

capturing differences in texture and fine -grained structures. 

Higher LPIPS values indicate more varied synthetic images, 

which is important under few -shot settings.  Table III 

summarizes FID and LPIPS scores obtained for synthetic 

EndoFSA  images  produced by  each few -shot regime 

alongside  scores obtained for synthetic images  generated by 

EndoFSA  model  trained  without few -shot constraints  (i.e., 

trained on the whole  𝒟 ab normal  subsets)  which is  denoted as 

EndoFSA  (full ). Bold indicates the  best scores obtained.  On 

KID  dataset, the  lowest  (best)  FID score  of 75.60  was 

achieved  for  K=50 , whereas on Kvasir -Capsule  the lowest 

FID score of  74.03  was  achieved  for  K=100 , indicating that 

for the respective training regimes  the abnormal WCE images 

generated by  EndoFSA  more  closely resemble the real 

abnormal . It can be  noticed  that training EndoFSA  using the 

entire  𝒟 ab normal  data distribution , resulted in only  a marginal 

FID score improvement  of 0.53 % for the  KID dataset ,

whereas there was  no  improvement  for  Kvasir -Capsule. 

LPIPS score s remained  relatively  consistent across all models 

with  only marginal differences of 1 .00 %, suggesting similar 

perceptual diversity  across different training strategies . For 

KID dataset  the highest  LPIPS score of 0.4 2 was observed for 

K=10  and  K=50  regime , whereas  for  Kvasir -Capsule  the 

highest  LPIPS  score of 0.5 3 was obs erved  for  K=10  regime .

Overall, t hese results  indicate  that EndoFSA exhibits almost 

consistent performance across  various  data regimes. 

3)  Qualitative evaluation  of synthetic images 

Figure 2 presents a visual comparison  between  the 

abnormal images generated by the proposed  EndoFSA  model 

and real abnormal images provided by WCE datasets. It can 

be observed that  the  synthetic images produced by  EndoFSA ,

closely  reproduce the appearance of endoscopic abnormal 

tissue.  In particular, the synthetic images generated by 

EndoFSA , preserve  the  visual  characteristics of endoscopic 

lesions demonstrating  anticipated  color and texture variations 

as well as  lesion morphology . Synthetic  abnormal  images 

exhibit  lesion appearance resembling  that of  the  real  ones ,

indicating that the  cluster -wise diversity control  effectively 

mitigates mode collapse  when adversarial training is 

performed  under  limited data settings  i.e.,  using  100 or less 

of training samples . Moreover,  it can be noticed that 

abnormal conditions  are integrated in the endoscopic tissue 

without disturbing  the surrounding  normal tissue  and  relevant 

anatomical structures , demonstrating that the low -rank 

constrained adaptation training  preserves priors learned from 

normal WCE images . Additionally,  the  lesion findings  appear 

naturally blended with the normal endoscopic background ,

while  maintaining  mucosal characteristics  commonly 

captured during WCE  examinations  like bubbles , and 

illumination reflections. 

V.  CONCLUSION S

This paper presented  EndoFSA , a GAN  model  for few -

shot WCE abnormal image  generation. By leveraging a 

generator pretrained on  abundant  normal  data and adapting  it 

through  rank -constrained parameter  updates , the proposed 

framework enables plausible  image generation  of abnormal 

images,  using  only a limited number of  abnormal training 

sa mples  i.e ., 1 0, 50, 100 . By constraining adaptation  to  low -

dimensional subspace , EndoFSA  preserve s the  anatomical 

priors learned from normal gastrointestinal  images , while 

allowing controlled  synthesis of  abnorm alities  without 

requiring pixel -level annotations or additional supervision. 

Experimental evaluation across WCE benchmark datasets 

containing  diverse  abnormal  findings  showed that  the 

EndoFSA  produces realistic and diverse synthetic samples, as                                                                           

> TABLE II. COMPARISON OF DOWNSTREAM CLASSIFICATION
> PERFORMANCE ON REAL DATA USING INCEPTION V3 FOR DIFFERENT
> ADVERSARIAL TRAINING APPROACHES .
> KID dataset Kvasir -Capsule dataset
> Accuracy AUC Accuracy AUC
> EndoFSA (full) 88.66±2.03 94.54 ±1.01 76.22 ±1.84 85.44 ±2.12
> StyleGANv2 87.17 ±2.68 95.11±0.63 87.14±0.57 94.57±0.55
> TABLE III. QUANTITATIVE ASSESSMENT OF SYNTHETIC IMAGES
> KID Kvasir -Capsule
> FID↓ LPIPS ↑FID↓ LPIPS↑
> EndoFSA (k=10) 81.94 0.42 80.38 0.53
> EndoFSA (k=50) 75.60 0.42 75.45 0.52
> EndoFSA (k=100) 77.39 0.41 74.03 0.52
> EndoFSA (full) 76.86 0.41 76.39 0.52 (a) (b) (c) (d)
> Fig. 2. Real and synthetic WCE images generated by EndoFSA illustrating
> various abnormal conditions. (a) Real KID images. (b) Synthetic KID
> images (c) Real Kvasir -Capsule images .(d) Synthetic Kvasir -Capsule
> images. The synthetic images were generated using K=10 (first row) ,K=50
> (second row) and K=10 0(third row) samples from 𝒟 ab normal subset and
> using the entire ( full )𝒟 ab normal subset (fourth row).

reflected by quantitative  metrics and qualitative assessment. 

Furthermore,  training a CNN classifier  using  exclusively 

synthetic abnormal images  produced by  EndoFSA  resulted in 

performance  comparable  to  that achieved with  real  images .

Overall, the results obtained indicate that  low -rank 

constrained adaptation  of pretrained GAN s provides a

practical  optimization  strategy in the context WCE  abnormal 

image generation under low data regimes.  As  future research ,

we aim to extend  EndoFSA  to simultaneously generate 

corresponding abnormality mask s alongside  synthetic 

images,  further improving its  applicability  for  detection and 

segmentation tasks. 

REFERENCES 

[1]  A. D. Sperber, S. I. Bangdiwala, D. A. Drossman, U. C. Ghoshal, M. 

Simren, J. Tack, W. E. Whitehead, D. L. Dumitrascu, X. Fang, S. Fukudo, 

and others, “Worldwide prevalence and burden of functional gastrointestinal 

disorders, results of Rome Foundation Glo bal Study,”  Gastroenterology , vol. 

160, no. 1, pp. 99 –114, 2021. 

[2]  A. Riphaus, S. Richter, M. Vonderach, and T. Wehrmann, “Capsule 

endoscopy interpretation by an endoscopy nurse –a comparative trial,” 

Zeitschrift für Gastroenterologie , vol. 47, no. 03, pp. 273 –276, 2009. 

[3]  X. Dray, D. Iakovidis, C. Houdeville, R. Jover, D. Diamantis, A. 

Histace, and A. Koulaouzidis, “Artificial intelligence in small bowel capsule 

endoscopy -current status, challenges and future promise,”  Journal of 

gastroenterology and hepatology , vol. 36, no. 1, pp. 12 –19, 2021. 

[4]  D. Psychogyios, E. Mazomenos, F. Vasconcelos, and D. Stoyanov, 

“MSDESIS: Multitask stereo disparity estimation and surgical instrument 

segmentation,”  IEEE transactions on medical imaging , vol. 41, no. 11, pp. 

3218 –3230, 2022. 

[5]  P. Gatoula, D. E. Diamantis, A. Koulaouzidis, C. Carretero, S. 

Chetcuti -Zammit, P. C. Valdivia, B. González -Suárez, A. Mussetto, J. 

Plevris, A. Robertson, and others, “Clinical evaluation of medical image 

synthesis: a case study in wireless capsule endosc opy,”  Scientific Reports ,

vol. 15, no. 1, p. 35068, 2025. 

[6]  D. E. Diamantis, P. Gatoula, A. Koulaouzidis, and D. K. Iakovidis, 

“This Intestine Does Not Exist: Multiscale Residual Variational 

Autoencoder for Realistic Wireless Capsule Endoscopy Image Generation,” 

IEEE Access , vol. 12, pp. 25668 –25683, 2024. 

[7]  I. Goodfellow, J. Pouget -Abadie, M. Mirza, B. Xu, D. Warde -Farley, 

S. Ozair, A. Courville, and Y. Bengio, “Generative adversarial networks,” 

Communications of the ACM , vol. 63, no. 11, pp. 139 –144, 2020. 

[8]  T. Karras, S. Laine, M. Aittala, J. Hellsten, J. Lehtinen, and T. Aila, 

“Analyzing and improving the image quality of stylegan,” in  Proceedings of 

the IEEE/CVF conference on computer vision and pattern recognition , 2020, 

pp. 8110 –8119. 

[9]  D. Yoon, H. -J. Kong, B. S. Kim, W. S. Cho, J. C. Lee, M. Cho, M. H. 

Lim, S. Y. Yang, S. H. Lim, J. Lee, and others, “Colonoscopic image 

synthesis with generative adversarial network for enhanced detection of 

sessile serrated lesions using convolutional ne ural network,”  Scientific 

reports , vol. 12, no. 1, p. 261, 2022. 

[10]  A. Vats, M. Pedersen, A. Mohammed, and Ø. Hovde, “Evaluating 

clinical diversity and plausibility of synthetic capsule endoscopic images,” 

Scientific Reports , vol. 13, no. 1, p. 10857, 2023. 

[11]  V. Thambawita, P. Salehi, S. A. Sheshkal, S. A. Hicks, H. L. Hammer, 

S. Parasa, T. de Lange, P. Halvorsen, and M. A. Riegler, “SinGAN -Seg: 

Synthetic training data generation for medical image segmentation,”  PloS 

one , vol. 17, no. 5, p. e0267976, 2022. 

[12]  J. Seo, J. -S. Kang, and G. -M. Park, “Lfs -gan: Lifelong few -shot image 

generation,” in  Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF international conference on 

computer vision , 2023, pp. 11356 –11366. 

[13]  Y. Wang, C. Wu, L. Herranz, J. Van de Weijer, A. Gonzalez -Garcia, 

and B. Raducanu, “Transferring gans: generating images from limited data,” 

in  Proceedings of the European conference on computer vision (ECCV) ,

2018, pp. 218 –234. 

[14]  A. Aldhubri, J. Lu, and G. Fu, “SAGAN: Skip attention generative 

adversarial networks for few -shot image generation,”  Digital Signal 

Processing , vol. 149, p. 104466, 2024. 

[15]  M. Yang, Z. Wang, Z. Chi, and W. Du, “ProtoGAN: Towards high 

diversity and fidelity image synthesis under limited data,”  Information 

Sciences , vol. 632, pp. 698 –714, 2023. 

[16]  K. Guo, J. Chen, T. Qiu, S. Guo, T. Luo, T. Chen, and S. Ren, 

“MedGAN: An adaptive GAN approach for medical image generation,” 

Computers in Biology and Medicine , vol. 163, p. 107119, 2023. 

[17]  H. -C. Park, I. -P. Hong, S. Poudel, and C. Choi, “Data augmentation 

based on generative adversarial networks for endoscopic image 

classification,”  IEEE Access , vol. 11, pp. 49216 –49225, 2023. 

[18]  A. B. Chlopowiec, A. R. Chlopowiec, K. Galus, W. Cebula, and M. 

Tabakov, “Local lesion generation is effective for capsule endoscopy image 

data augmentation in a limited data setting,”  arXiv e -prints , p. arXiv –2411, 

2024. 

[19]  C. Szegedy, V. Vanhoucke, S. Ioffe, J. Shlens, and Z. Wojna, 

“Rethinking the inception architecture for computer vision,” in  Proceedings 

of the IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern recognition , 2016, 

pp. 2818 –2826. 

[20]  K. Simonyan and A. Zisserman, “Very Deep Convolutional Networks 

for Large -Scale Image Recognition,”  CoRR , vol. abs/1409.1556, 2014. 

[21]  A. Koulaouzidis, D. K. Iakovidis, D. E. Yung, E. Rondonotti, U. 

Kopylov, J. N. Plevris, E. Toth, A. Eliakim, G. W. Johansson, W. Marlicz, 

and others, “KID Project: an internet -based digital video atlas of capsule 

endoscopy for research purposes,”  Endoscopy international open , vol. 5, no. 

06, pp. E477 –E483, 2017. 

[22]  P. H. Smedsrud, V. Thambawita, S. A. Hicks, H. Gjestang, O. O. 

Nedrejord, E. Næss, H. Borgli, D. Jha, T. J. D. Berstad, S. L. Eskeland, and 

others, “Kvasir -Capsule, a video capsule endoscopy dataset,”  Scientific 

Data , vol. 8, no. 1, p. 142, 2021. 

[23]  P. Gatoula, G. Dimas, and D. K. Iakovidis, “Interpretable Similarity 

of Synthetic Image Utility,”  IEEE Transactions on Medical Imaging , 2026 ,

doi:  10.1109/TMI.2026.3679527 .

[24]  M. Heusel, H. Ramsauer, T. Unterthiner, B. Nessler, and S. 

Hochreiter, “Gans trained by a two time -scale update rule converge to a local 

nash equilibrium,”  Advances in neural information processing systems , vol. 

30, 2017. 

[25]  R. Zhang, P. Isola, A. A. Efros, E. Shechtman, and O. Wang, “The 

unreasonable effectiveness of deep features as a perceptual metric,” in 

Proceedings of the IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern 

recognition , 2018, pp. 586 –595.