Title: AuraMask: An Extensible Pipeline for Developing Aesthetic Anti-Facial Recognition Image Filters

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2605.12937v1

Published Time: Thu, 14 May 2026 00:37:48 GMT

Number of Pages: 29

Markdown Content:
# AuraMask: An Extensible Pipeline for Creating User Acceptable Anti-Facial Recognition Image Filters 

## JACOB LAGOGIANNIS ∗† , Franklin and Marshall College, United States of America 

## WILLIAM AGNEW, Carnegie Mellon University, United States of America 

## ROSA I. ARRIAGA, Georgia Institute of Technology, United States of America 

## SAUVIK DAS, Carnegie Mellon University, United States of America 

Anti-facial recognition (AFR) image filters alter images in ways that are subtle to people but blinding to computer vision. Yet, despite widespread interest in these technologies to subvert surveillance, users rarely use them in practice — because the “subtle” alterations are visible enough to conflict with users’ self-presentation goals. To address this challenge, we propose AuraMask: a novel approach to creating AFR filters that are both adversarially effective and aesthetically acceptable. Using AuraMask, we produce 40 “aesthetic” filters that emulate popular “one-click” Instagram image filters. We show that AuraMask filters meet or exceed the adversarial effectiveness of prior methods against open-source facial recognition models. Moreover, in a controlled online user study ( 𝑁 = 630 ) we confirm these filters achieve significantly higher user acceptance than prior methods. Lastly, we provide our AFR pipeline to the community for accelerated research in adversarially effective and aesthetically acceptable protections. CCS Concepts: • Security and privacy → Privacy protections ; Usability in security and privacy ; Social aspects of security and privacy ; • Human-centered computing → User studies ; Heuristic evaluations .Additional Key Words and Phrases: facial recognition, adversarial machine learning, aesthetics, computer vision, subversive AI 

Single-Target Defense (ST) 

(a) Dogpatch (b) Moon (c) Nashville (d) Kelvin (e) Sierra (f) Sutro (g) Valencia Ensemble-Target Defense (ET) 

(h) Dogpatch (i) Moon (j) Nashville (k) Kelvin (l) Sierra (m) Sutro (n) Valencia Fig. 1. Aesthetic AFR defenses with Single (top) and Ensemble (bottom) Targets produced with the AuraMask pipeline. 

> ∗

Also with Georgia Institute of Technology. 

> †

Also with Carnegie Mellon University. Authors’ Contact Information: Jacob Lagogiannis, Franklin and Marshall College, Lancaster, PA, United States of America, jacob.logas@fandm.edu; William Agnew, Carnegie Mellon University, Pittsburgh, PA, United States of America; Rosa I. Arriaga, Georgia Institute of Technology, Atlanta, GA, United States of America; Sauvik Das, Carnegie Mellon University, Pittsburgh, PA, United States of America. 

1

> arXiv:2605.12937v1 [cs.CV] 13 May 2026

2 Lagogiannis et al. 

1 Introduction 

Facial recognition has never been easier. It is now possible to reliably and automatically identify people from photos or videos of their face even if partially occluded – wearing a mask [ 109 , 112 , 119 ] – or captured in suboptimal environments – low lighting [ 33 ]. Facial recognition is increasingly pervasive. Governments use it to create a panopticon for effortless monitoring of the movements, associations, and behaviors of their population [ 30 , 36 , 56 , 64 , 67 , 76 , 90 ]. Facial recognition has never been more pernicious. Employers employ facial recognition for “algorithmic management” to micromanage employee work and undermine unionization efforts [ 38 , 115 ]. Police departments around the world use flawed facial recognition systems which has only reinforced racialized policing [ 14 , 30 , 88 ] and are regularly misused to identify and arrest political adversaries [ 10 , 11 , 68 , 96 ]. As the journalist Kashmir Hill argues, modern facial recognition may very well mark the “the end of privacy as we know it.” [43] Yet, facial recognition is fragile. The underlying models and methods are reliant on high-quality data collected by corporations from their users [ 53 ]. This reliance introduces opportunities to avoid, sabotage, or otherwise undermine facial recognition systems. Anti-Facial Recognition (AFR) photo defenses [ 21 , 23 , 49 , 95 , 114 ] emerged as a method for resistance which introduce “subtle” perturbations into user-shared images that complicate learning (poison) or introduce doubt (evasion) into the facial recognition pipeline. One technique, Fawkes, was featured in the New York Times and was downloaded nearly a million times [ 43 , 95 ] shortly after public release. Despite initial public interest, however, few people regularly use these AFR defenses on photos they share; one reason being that adversarial methods tend to introduce visible artifacts into images do not align with users’ self-presentation goals [60]. Users have strong aesthetic and self-presentation preferences when sharing photos online [ 60 , 72 ] which often override secondary privacy concerns [ 31 , 40 , 55 , 61 , 72 ]. AFR defenses with visible artifacts were found to conflict with a user’s self-presentation goals [ 60 ] and are thus unlikely to have sustained use. However, users often use perceptible image filters before sharing photos online for aesthetic or creative purposes [ 7, 52 ] and indeed many images are algorithmically processed at the moment of capture on mobile phones [ 78 , 116 ]. Thus, we seek to understand ( RQ1 )“How can we design anti-facial recognition defenses that are better aligned with people’s aesthetic and self-presentation preferences?” To investigate, we present the extensible AuraMask toolkit that supports Multi-Task Learning (MTL) [123] training of AFR defenses with aesthetic and adversarial objectives. However, neither user acceptance nor adversarial effectiveness necessarily follow from the proposed design, thus we pose two additional research questions: RQ2 How do aesthetic AFR defenses compare to existing defenses in evading facial recognition? RQ3 How do aesthetic AFR defenses compare to existing defenses in terms of user acceptance? We address RQ2 by evaluating our aesthetic AFR defenses on a battery of facial recognition benchmarks using state-of-the-art recognition models. Our evaluations demonstrated that our AuraMask defenses retained adversarial effectiveness consistent with or better than prior approaches (i.e., LowKey [23] and Fawkes [95], respectively). To answer RQ3, we conducted a two-iteration user study with 𝑁 = 630 participants who gauged the acceptability of several AFR defenses on the Subversive AI Assessment (SAIA-8) scale [ 60 ], a psychometric scale developed to measure user acceptance of image obfuscation. Through our analysis, participants found the AuraMask defenses to be significantly more acceptable and preferable to prior approaches. In summary, our key contributions are: 

• A pipeline to generate AFR defenses that account for the output aesthetics. 

• A set of 80 proof-of-concept AuraMask defenses that emulate existing (non-protective) image filters. 

• Validation and comparison of technical efficacy in both ”white-box“ and ”black-box“ scenarios. AuraMask 3

• Empirical evidence of greater user acceptance of AuraMask aesthetic AFR defenses over prior methods. 

1.1 Are Anti-Facial Recognition Defenses Ethical? 

There is a debate within the Security and Privacy community on whether user-facing AFR technologies is appropriate to address facial recognition harms. The critiques raised (e.g., [ 83 ]) have merit and deserve careful consideration; we discuss these critiques and our own perspective in more depth in the Discussion section (6.1). 

2 Background 

Online Social Network (OSN)s, for all their benefits, have had a number of key negative social impacts [ 13 , 18 , 63 ]. One of these negative impacts is an increased risk of privacy invasions. To mitigate these risks, the Security and Privacy (S&P) community has long developed user-focused, privacy-enhancing technologies that enable “active non-participation” – i.e., obfuscation , sabotage , and exodus [20 ]. Most of these tools, however effective, have low overall adoption. Here, we give an overview of prior work related to how and why users share personal images online. We also present research on efforts to protect individual privacy when sharing said images. 

2.1 Photo Sharing Behaviors Online 

A variety of complex factors contribute to a persons’ motivation to share personal information online [ 5 , 104 ]. Oeldorf-Hirsch and Sundar identified four motivating factors for online image sharing [ 73 ]: Seeking and Showcasing Experiences, Technological Affordances, Social Connection, and Reaching Out. In addition, much of the literature suggests that one’s self presentation greatly influences what is shared online [ 26 , 34 , 45 , 80 , 87 ] as are social pressures [ 9 , 24 , 37 , 39 , 46 , 102 ]. While seemingly not a primary concern, privacy also impacts what is considered shareable online influencing some to engage in actions to mitigate privacy invasions [2, 122]. 

2.1.1 Image Alterations in Sharing. Even before the rise of image-based OSNs (e.g., Instagram), people touched up their photos in line with their self-presentation preferences. While there was a movement toward more authentic, unaltered photos on social media [ 86 ], people still regularly modify personal images before sharing [ 7]. The popularity of this behavior can be attributed, in part, to the breadth of available alterations which introduced a new dimension for creativity [ 50 , 77 , 79 ] and enhanced control over public presentation [ 12 , 45 , 52 ]. Moreover, altered images achieve a higher audience engagement [ 7, 110 ], a benefit in the attention economy [ 69 , 124 ]. It is therefore unsurprising that users expend time and effort in applying modifications to their images before sharing [7]. 

2.2 Active Non-Participation through Obfuscation 

Obfuscation is the deliberate addition of ambiguous, confusing, or misleading information to interfere with surveillance and data collection with the goals of buying time, providing cover or deniability, evading observation, interfering with profiling, or expressing protest [ 15 ]. Obfuscation tactics have a long history of use by marginalized populations to communicate under the gaze of powerful centralized institutions. However, efforts to avoid observation also animates forensic efforts to detect and de-obfuscate secret messages. This kind of “arms race” is familiar to those within the security community [ 58 , 83 , 113 ]. Thus, it is important to note that the goal of obfuscation is to evade, obstruct, or buy time, and not necessarily to permanently protect. Image obfuscation can take many forms, but here we focus on image obfuscation which can be interactive or authored .4 Lagogiannis et al. 

2.2.1 Interactive Image Obfuscation. This form of obfuscation requires interaction by both parties – image sharer and observer – and allows for greater affordances in secret data access control. Oftentimes, this obfuscation approach requires splitting the image into parts that are encrypted [ 42 ] or stored elsewhere [ 82 ]. Others use techniques like steganography to hide secret data in plain sight [ 6, 61 , 98 ]. These approaches allow for granular protection of shared images; however, their use is often simple to detect by a casual observer as the publicly shared images are highly perturbed and thus simple to disrupt by a central authority. 

2.2.2 Authored Image Obfuscation. Authored image obfuscation only requires action on the part of the sharer who modifies the secret data in a way that is unintelligible to a specific threat but is understood by the intended audience. 

2.2.3 Obfuscation through Redaction. The most straightforward way to avoid sensitive data exposure is through redaction. Hassan et al. automated redaction with a tool that autonomously classified sensitive image portions and obscured them with a cartoon image [ 41 ]. Other techniques target face recognition by blurring [ 59 ], cartooning [ 32 , 41 ], or otherwise redacting a visible face. As with interactive methods, a drawback of redaction is noticeability as the changes are immediately evident and could negatively impact image utility. However, advances in Adversarial Machine Learning (AML) introduced an opportunity to mitigate this drawback by requiring only slight data alterations to sabotage deep learning models [101]. 

2.2.4 Adversarial Obfuscation. Modern face obfuscation systems can sabotage facial recognition with adversarial image alterations [ 23 , 49 , 51 , 95 , 114 ]. Using AML techniques [ 101 ], these systems generate adversarial noise to fool the underlying processes of the facial recognition pipeline. Within AFR, multiple stages of the facial recognition process can be targeted – i.e., image capture, processing, feature extraction, reference database creation, or database querying for identification [ 114 ]. Although prior work has proposed a variety of effective AFR methods, the approach to image quality is fairly uniform, i.e., generate human imperceptible defenses by minimizing a perception heuristic like Learned Perceptual Image Patch Similarity (LPIPS) [ 121 ]. Intuitively, an imperceptible obfuscation will retain image utility and thus be acceptable to the user. Yet even with mainstream interest [ 43 ], few have adopted these systems. More recent work interrogated the imperceptibility hypothesis finding that even when imperceptibility was achieved, it was undesirable to users [ 60 ]. Here, we build on prior literature to explore the viability and acceptability of “intentionally perceptible” AFR defenses that are designed to be aesthetically pleasing. 

3 AuraMask: An Extensible Pipeline for Developing Aesthetic Anti-Facial Recognition Image Filters 

In this section, we detail AuraMask 1 — a flexible and extensible toolkit for generating aesthetic AFR photo filters (“defenses”) that we use to emulate popular social media one-click image filters ( RQ1 ). 

3.1 Threat Model 

Typically, in Adversarial Machine Learning (AML) research, those who deploy algorithmic inference are considered “defenders” and those who sabotage algorithmic inference are considered “attackers.” We flip this framing to adopt a Subversive AI perspective [ 25 ] in which the inference system — i.e., a facial recognition system — is the “attacker” and the individual aiming to evade recognition is the “defender.” 

> 1https://gitlab.com/raccs-lab/auramask-library

AuraMask 5

Aquisition[99] 

𝑓 (𝐴 ) → ©«

𝑎 1

...𝑎 𝑛 

ª®®¬

Extract ®𝐸 𝑎 

Reference[81] 

𝑓 (𝐵 ) → ©«

𝑏 1

...𝑏 𝑛 

ª®®¬

Extract ®𝐸 𝑏 

Detect & Align 

𝐷 ( ® 𝐸 𝑎 , ®𝐸 𝑏 ) ≤ 𝜏 𝑓 

> Fig. 2. Face verification task with obfuscation opportunity in green and obfuscation target highlighted in orange.

In this formulation, an attacker has (1) no prior knowledge of the victim’s identity, (2) a reference image of the victim, and (3) an automated facial recognition system that matches the reference image with images connected to personal information (i.e., social media). 

AuraMask defenses may evade one or more “white box”, open weight face recognition models 𝑓 ∈ F. However, an ideal defense should be effective against unseen models — i.e., they should transfer to “black box” models. Thus, in section 4, we leave one model out of training to assess the transferability of AFR defenses produced with AuraMask .

3.2 Defense Goal 

In common parlance, “facial recognition” is a catch-all term for the full recognition pipeline, its component parts – i.e., detection, alignment, feature extraction – or specific uses of its output – e.g., emotion recognition, gender recognition, face verification. We design AuraMask to target the feature extraction component of the recognition pipeline, disrupting 

face verification . The feature extraction step accepts an aligned face as input ( 𝑓 (𝑥 )) and generates 𝑁 -dimensional vectors, or face embeddings ( ®𝐸 ), as outputs. This step is crucial to face verification as face identities are determined by the distance between embeddings. Embeddings within a tuned distance threshold ( 𝜏 𝑓 ) are considered to belong to the same person. In modern systems, 𝑓 is a ML model [ 19 , 28 , 75 , 89 ] trained to minimize the distance between an identity; while retaining separability amongst individuals. Most modern models are trained to optimize for cosine distance 𝐷 𝐶 :

𝐷 𝐶 ( ® 𝐸 𝑎 , ®𝐸 𝑏 ) = 1 − 𝑆 𝐶 ( ® 𝐸 𝑎 , ®𝐸 𝑏 ) = 1 − ®𝐸 𝑎 · ® 𝐸 𝑏 

|| ® 𝐸 𝑎 || × || ® 𝐸 𝑏 || (1) 6 Lagogiannis et al. Where 𝑎 and 𝑏 are images of a face, ®𝐸 𝑎 |𝑏 are face embeddings generated from a feature extraction model 𝑓 (𝑥 ), and 

𝑆 𝐶 ( ® 𝐸 𝑎 , ®𝐸 𝑏 ) denotes cosine similarity. Prior work has shown AML attacks are effective in disrupting the feature extraction step and undermining face verification accuracy [ 21 , 23 , 49 , 95 ]. We adopt this approach in the design of AuraMask to sabotage an extraction model 𝑓 , leveraging the point of control that users still have – altering images before posting online. Moreover, we build on prior AFR approaches by encouraging exploration outside “imperceptibility” – i.e., minimal noticeable difference between 𝑥 (the original image) and ˆ𝑥 (the perturbed image) – with a modular pipeline design for experimentation with aesthetic heuristics – e.g., emulation of popular image filters. In this work, we assume face verification is performed by comparing one altered and one unaltered image. This assumption would hold if, an adversarial actor took a photo of someone in the physical world (unaltered) and tried to match it to their social media profile picture (altered). 

3.3 Problem Formulation 

The optimization problem in the AuraMask pipeline is twofold: (1) The face in the output image cannot be algorithmically recognized as the same face in an unaltered image. (2) The output image aligns with some heuristic for image aesthetics. Integrating aesthetics as a parallel objective may, at first, seem disconnected or indeed orthogonal to the protection objective. Note, however, that prior approaches [ 23 , 49 , 95 ] optimize for both adversarial effect and proximal perceptual metrics to generate “imperceptible” defenses. These optimization heuristics – i.e., Learned Perceptual Image Patch Similarity (LPIPS) amongst others – were critiqued for inadequately aligning with human perception [ 91 ] and how the resulting defenses were perceived by end users [60]. Thus, we re-contextualize and extend the defense objective with a Multi-Task Learning (MTL) approach [ 118 , 123 ]. Within MTL, a network is concurrently optimized for two or more distinct but conceptually similar tasks. Here, the two tasks were to sabotage the facial recognition pipeline and to generate outputs that align with an aesthetic concept. These two tasks are promising for a MTL approach as they both accomplish this goal through altering image pixels. To investigate this theoretical synergy, we designed the AuraMask pipeline to generate image filters that defend against facial recognition – i.e., max 𝐷 𝐶 – while concurrently optimizing for one or more aesthetic heuristics – i.e., L𝐴𝐸𝑆 .

> Face Verified

0.5 1.0 1.5

−0.5

0.5

𝐷 𝐶 

L 𝜏 𝑓 

L𝐹 𝐸 

L𝐹 𝐸𝐴 

L𝐹 𝐸𝐴𝑇    

> Fig. 3. Plot of face embedding losses with respect to cosine distance, highlighting where faces are considered validated for 𝜏 =0.6

AuraMask 7

3.3.1 Objective 1: Sabotaging Face Embeddings. To increase the distance between 𝑥 and ˆ𝑥 , prior methods adopt the Face Embedding ( L𝐹 𝐸 ) loss [ 49 ] which optimizes for the maximum cosine distance or minimum cosine similarity – i.e., opposite cosine direction. 

arg min  

> ˆ𝑥

𝑆 𝐶 (𝑓 (𝑥 ), 𝑓 ( ˆ𝑥 )) (2) where 𝑓 is the targeted face embedding model, 𝑥 is the unaltered image, ˆ𝑥 is the adversarially perturbed image generated by 𝑔 , and 𝑆 𝐶 is the cosine similarity 1. The downside of L𝐹 𝐸 is its greedy nature, encouraging optimization well beyond orthogonality which is generally unnecessary to sabotage face verification. Thus, to address over-optimization which could add unnecessary perturbations, we propose two alterations to 

L𝐹 𝐸 . First, the Face Embedding Absolute ( L𝐹 𝐸𝐴 ) loss seeks to limit over-optimization by penalizing distances beyond orthogonality by taking the absolute value of L𝐹 𝐸 :

arg min  

> ˆ𝑥

|𝑆 𝐶 (𝑓 (𝑥 ), 𝑓 ( ˆ𝑥 ))| (3) However, this loss does not directly target the verification task nor is it particularly descriptive – e.g., a loss of 0.5 doesn’t meaningfully convey effectiveness against face verification. Our second alteration incorporates the tuned distance threshold ( 𝜏 𝑓 ) for a given model – under which embeddings are considered to belong to the same person – into the L𝐹 𝐸𝐴 loss resulting in the Face Embedding Absolute Threshold (L𝐹 𝐸𝐴𝑇 ) loss. 

arg min  

> ˆ𝑥

|𝑆 𝐶 (𝑓 (𝑥 ), 𝑓 ( ˆ𝑥 ))| − 𝜏 𝑓 (4) This loss both targets the decision boundary for face verification while constraining against over-optimization. L𝐹 𝐸𝐴𝑇 

also improves upon interpret-ability over L𝐹 𝐸𝐴 as a negative value demonstrates effectiveness against face verification. 

3.3.2 Objective 2: Integrating Aesthetics. Unlike the prior objective, the aesthetic objective – L𝐴𝐸𝑆 – has no singularly agreed upon optimum given that much of “aesthetic” evaluation is subjective. Thus, instead of providing a prescriptive aesthetic heuristic for AFR defenses, we designed AuraMask to interchangeably accept any aesthetic heuristic by leveraging the backend-agnostic Keras 3 library. This design eases the use of both existing and novel “aesthetic” heuristics when implemented with the keras.Loss class, which accepts batched image input and performs differentiable computations to arrive at a numeric output. Through this approach, novel AFR defenses may be integrated into a range of image aesthetic enhancement methods – e.g., style transfer [ 97 ], learned quality assessments [ 103 ], or computational photography methods [ 27 , 65 ]. Note, however, that learned image heuristics ( L𝐿𝑅𝑁 𝐷 ) may share latent embeddings with facial recognition models and may therefore be disrupted by improved adversarial effect – e.g., L𝐹 𝐸 , L𝐹 𝐸𝐴 , or 

L𝐹 𝐸𝐴𝑇 . Thus, we recommend inclusion of a closed-form loss ( L𝐶𝐿𝑆𝐷 ) – i.e., MSE, MAE, SSIM – when using a learned heuristic. A simple L𝐴𝐸𝑆 may be defined as: 

arg min  

> ˆ𝑥

L𝐿𝑅𝑁 𝐷 (𝑥, ˆ𝑥 ) + L 𝐶𝐿𝑆𝐷 (𝑥, ˆ𝑥 ) (5) With the two objectives ( L𝐹 𝐸𝐴𝑇 and L𝐴𝐸𝑆 ) we thus seek to optimize the defense ( 𝑔 ) such that: 

∀𝑥 ∈X arg min  

> 𝑥

L𝐹 𝐸𝐴𝑇 (𝑥, 𝑔 (𝑥 )) + L 𝐴𝐸𝑆 (𝑥, 𝑔 (𝑥 )) (6) 

3.4 Technical Infrastructure and Definitions 

Many prior AML-based obfuscations use iterative methods to generate effective outputs through multiple forward and backward passes over target models (e.g., Projected Gradient Descent (PGD) [ 66 ] or the Fast Gradient Sign Method 8 Lagogiannis et al. (FGSM) [ 3]). We designed the AuraMask pipeline to instead take advantage of the Adversarial Transformation Network (ATN) [ 8, 49 ]. Unlike FGSM and PGD, the ATN learns to predict an effective adversarial perturbation. As such, it can apply a defense with only a single forward pass and does not need to access the targeted model(s) when applying this pass. This is because the Adversarial Transformation Network (ATN) is trained to transform an input into an adversarial example against one or more target networks. Such networks can be targeted or untargeted, trained for white-box or black-box contexts. Formally, an ATN [8] is defined as: 

𝑔 F (𝑥 ) : 𝑥 ∈ 𝑋 → ˆ𝑥 (7) where F is the set of target models and 𝑥 ≈ ˆ𝑥 but 𝑓 (𝑥 ) ≠ 𝑓 ( ˆ𝑥 )∀ 𝑓 ∈ F. At inference time, 𝑔 F may be run on any input 𝑥 

without access to 𝑓 ∈ F or further gradient computations. These properties make an ATN much faster to use than even single iteration of FGSM. However, such an approach introduces the complexity of training data, model architecture, and training hyperparameters. 

3.4.1 Training Data. We designed AuraMask with in-built support for three face-based training datasets and interfaces for easy integration of new datasets. 

Flickr Diverse Faces (FDF) [ 48 ] consists of 1.5 million faces collected from the Flickr image sharing site and is notable for labeling images with face bounding boxes and including copyright licenses. Images in this dataset have a diverse distribution in pose, age, ethnicity, occlusions, face paint, and image background. 

Labeled Faces in the Wild (LFW) [47 ] consists of 13.2k unique images featuring people from a diverse population and captured under various conditions and poses. A specialized subset of 2.2k image pairs is used to benchmark face recognition models. Each image pair is labeled as the same person (1) or different people (0), balanced with 1.1k for each class. 

VGGFace2 [19 ] consists of 3.3 million images and which represent 10,000 individuals collected from Google Image Search and manually labeled for identity. As with FDF, this dataset claims a diversity in subject, pose, and quality. 

3.4.2 Model Architecture and Hyperparameters. The objectives we formalize above require a model architecture that supports ingesting an image ( 𝑥 ) and generating an altered version of that image ( ˆ𝑥 ) – i.e., an image to image model. The U-Net, with its symmetric encoder and decoder, has emerged as a powerful and dynamic architecture for image to image tasks from segmentation [ 85 ] to resolution enhancement [ 84 ]. Thus, we implemented five UNet-based architectures in 

AuraMask to use as a basis for creating novel ATN defenses 2: UNet [ 85 ], VNet [ 70 ], R2U-Net [ 4], Attention U-Net [ 74 ], ResUnet-a [ 29 ]. In AuraMask , each architecture may be used with a default set of structural parameters or may be customized with a JSON file to ease hyperparameter experimentation. 

3.5 Implementation 

We use the pipeline detailed above to create a proof-of-concept set of “aesthetic” AFR defenses to address RQ2 and RQ3. The “aesthetic” heuristic we use is similarity to existing image filters available on the Instagram photo-sharing OSN given prior work found “that users like to apply [Instagram] filters on their photos even though it is a time-consuming process and requires spending more effort” [ 7]. In total, we generated 80 Instagram filter-like defenses: 40 Single-Target 

> 2Modernized from [94]

AuraMask 9Defense (ST) – trained against the ArcFace [ 28 ] embedding model – and 40 Ensemble-Target Defense (ET) – trained against both ArcFace and VGGFace2 [19] embedding models. 

3.5.1 L𝐴𝐸𝑆 : Emulating Aesthetic Image Filters. In the context of the two objectives described before, our second objective for the AuraMask defenses we created was to introduce alterations similar to an image filter known to be aesthetically pleasing. Formally, for a given graphical filter ( 𝑖 ∈ I) we seek to minimize the error between the generated output (𝑔 (𝑥 ) → ˆ𝑥 ) and the output of a graphical filter ( 𝑖 (𝑥 ) → ˜𝑥 ) such that ˆ𝑥 ≊ ˜𝑥 . To date, no dataset exists to meet both these tasks; thus, we leveraged the pilgram2 3 library which programmatically applies a given Instagram filter ( 𝑖 ∈ I). This approach has the advantage of being applicable to any image dataset since the target outputs ( ˜𝑥 ) are generated at training time. We trained both ST and ET defenses by minimizing the difference between ˆ𝑥 and ˜𝑥 as measured by a classically-trained, full-reference perceptual loss heuristic and a closed-form heuristic. The learned heuristic, L𝑇 𝑜𝑝𝐼𝑄 [ 22 ], accepts two images and generates a score between 0 and 1 representing the perceptual similarity between the images. However, as mentioned previously, learned heuristics can be negatively impacted by AFR optimizations 4. Thus, we include a closed-form heuristic to mitigate interference on the learned heuristic. In our STs, we found L𝑀𝑆𝐸 – mean squared error based on pixels – to sufficiently mitigate the effect of AFR optimizations on L𝑇 𝑜𝑝𝐼𝑄 . The ETs, however, proved more susceptible to inadvertent heuristic interference which L𝑀𝑆𝐸 was unable to mitigate, so we adopted L𝑆𝑆𝐼 𝑀 – a metric which measures image similarity based on luminance, contrast, and structure [ 111 ]. We formalize L𝐴𝐸𝑆 in this work as: 

𝑆𝑇 L𝐴𝐸𝑆 : L𝑇 𝑜𝑝𝐼𝑄 + L 𝑀𝑆𝐸 

2 (8) 

𝐸𝑇 L𝐴𝐸𝑆 : L𝑇 𝑜𝑝𝐼𝑄 + L 𝑆𝑆𝐼 𝑀 

2 (9) 

3.5.2 Model Architecture. Our proof-of-concept defenses were trained on the VNet architecture, modified for 2D [ 94 ]. We took this approach given the architectural implications raised by Hussain et al. [ 49 ] – demonstrating that the standard convolutions of a UNet were insufficient to defend against facial recognition but a stack of convolutions with recurrent connections performed well. Thus, we use five recurrent convolutions for the encoding and decoding steps starting with a width of 64 channels and doubling at each step except the last – i.e. [64, 128, 256, 512, 512]. The number of stacked encoding convolutions is mirrored in the decoding path, starting with the initial stack of one and increasing to a maximum of three. In addition, we confirmed that using pooling and unpooling layers for down and up-sampling were detrimental to adversarial defense effectiveness. 

3.5.3 Training Procedure. We trained each of our 80 proof-of-concept AFR defenses on an NVIDIA H100 GPU over 500 epochs which performed 50 training steps of 64 256x256 images. VNet weights were optimized using AdamW [ 62 ] with a learning rate of 1𝑒 − 4.Our training dataset, Flickr Diverse Faces (FDF) [ 48 ], consists of 1.5 million face images collected from the Flickr image sharing service with a diverse distribution of age, pose, ethnicity, occlusion, face paint, and background. In training, we use a subset of images with a size greater than or equal to 256x256 – about 4% of the total dataset – of which we take a 90/10 split resulting in 217k training and 24k validation images. We chose this subset to avoid interpolation artifacts that upscaling could introduce. 

> 3https://github.com/mgineer85/pilgram2
> 4See Figure 11

10 Lagogiannis et al. When training, images were preprocessed by resizing to 256x256, center cropping to 224x224, and applying FancyPCA – a technique to capture “an important property of natural images, i.e., that identity is invariant to changes in the intensity and color of the illumination” [ 54 ]. We also randomly apply geometric augmentations – i.e., either vertical or horizontal flip – at a rate of 0.5 and non-geometric augmentations – i.e., guassian blurring, gaussian noise, or image sharpening – at a rate of 0.2 to the training data. Finally, we generated the target output by applying a given pilgram2 

filter to the training data. 

4 Technical Evaluation 

To address RQ2 , we calculated how well our proof-of-concept aesthetic AFR defenses compared to existing defenses (i.e., Fawkes and LowKey) at evading facial recognition across a range of scenarios. 

4.1 Evaluation Configuration 

4.1.1 Datasets. We use the test split of the FDF dataset and the “pairs” configuration of the Labeled Faces in the Wild (LFW) [57] dataset. 

Flickr Diverse Faces (FDF) We evaluated adversarial and quality performance with the testing split which has 6.53k unique images. When testing, images were resized to 256x256 and center cropped to 224x224 with no other preprocessing alterations applied. 

Labeled Faces in the Wild (LFW) Consists of 13.2k unique images featuring people from a diverse population and captured under various conditions and poses. Within LFW, a specialized subset of 2.2k image pairs is often used as a benchmark to compare novel face recognition models [ 71 ]. Each image pair is labeled as either the same person (1) or different people (0), balanced with 1.1k pairs for each class. We use this subset to measure the impact each defense has on the recall for the 1.1k pairs that represent true positive in the face verification task. 

4.1.2 Baseline Controls. We compared our “aesthetic” defenses against two prior PGD-based AFR defenses – Fawkes [ 95 ] and LowKey [ 23 ] – which were optimized for imperceptibility. While we do not formally report on obfuscation generation time against these baseline defenses, the ATN method that AuraMask -based defenses use is significantly faster than PGD-based approaches (1-3s versus minutes in some cases) [49]. 

4.1.3 Target Facial Recognition Models. We evaluated adversarial effectiveness against pretrained implementations of four facial recognition models from the DeepFace Python repository: ArcFace [ 28 ], VGGFace2 [ 19 ], and Facenet [ 89 ]

> 5

[92, 93]. 

4.2 Adversarial Effectiveness: Evaluation Metrics 

We measured adversarial effectiveness of the defenses we tested (RQ2) using both the distance divergence and face verification recall metrics. 

4.2.1 Distance Divergence. Distance divergence measures how successful each defense is in moving the cosine distance of an image beyond the verification threshold for a given face embedding. We quantify distance divergence as the ratio of image pairs ( 𝑥 , ˆ𝑥 ) in the test split of the FDF dataset that fall within the verification threshold for a given face embedding model ( 𝑓 ). This metric represents the worst-case difficulty for face verification defense, where the image using to query is present in unaltered form in the facial recognition database. 

> 5https://github.com/serengil/deepface

AuraMask 11 

4.2.2 Face Verification Recall. Face verification recall measures how well each defense sabotages face verification recall performance for pairs of unique images using the “positive pairs” subset of the LFW benchmark. In evaluation, we quantify face verification recall as the ratio of true positives – i.e., cosine distance accurately falls within a given threshold ( 𝜏 𝑓 ) – over the total number of positive pairs in the test set [ 92 , 93 ]. As face verification works best on inputs cropped to a face, we used an off-the-shelf implementation of MTCNN [ 120 ] to detect and crop to faces for both images in the pair. We only consider true positive pairs (i.e., recall rate), as our primary aim was to increase false negatives and not false positives in face verification. This metric serves as a comparison point between prior defenses and our “aesthetic” defenses in reducing the effectiveness of face recognition pipelines. In addition, we evaluated the recall rate for face verification when both images of a pair are obfuscated. While this case is implicitly excluded by our threat model (which assumed that the attacker has only an unaltered image of the subject), we performed this evaluation to understand the effectiveness of the tested AFR defenses in the more pessimistic case wherein an attacker also has a different obfuscated image of the subject. We performed two sets of evaluation with eight of the AFR AuraMask -based defenses – four Single-Target Defense (ST) and four Ensemble-Target Defense (ET) .For brevity, we present the adversarial and quality measures for four of the ST and ET defenses: i.e., Dogpatch, Nashville, Sutro, and Moon 6.

4.3 Results 

ArcFace [28] VGGFace [19] Facenet [89] Baseline 1.000 1.000 1.000 

LowKey [23] 0.974 0.970 0.470 

Fawkes [95] 

L 0.993 1.000 0.888 

M 0.921 0.998 0.643 

H 0.864 0.997 0.519 

Dogpatch ST 0.006 0.996 0.956 

ET 0.087 0.200 0.339 

Moon ST 0.008 0.996 0.874 

ET 0.011 0.077 0.096 

Nashville ST 0.015 1.000 0.965 

ET 0.052 0.107 0.244 

Sutro ST 0.006 1.000 0.969 

ET 0.024 0.128 0.171     

> Table 1. Face verification recall rate with FDF testing subset – verifying 𝑥 and ˆ𝑥 pairs.

4.3.1 Distance Divergence. In Table 1, we report the face verification accuracy on the test split of FDF where 𝑥 and ˆ𝑥 

are pairs. We can see from this data that the STs outperform the prior methods and the ETs when applied to ArcFace – the model it was trained against. However, it is also evident that this performance does not transfer well to unseen, “black box” models – i.e. Facenet and VGGFace2. ETs, on the other hand, outperform prior methods when used against either ArcFace or VGGFace2 – the models it was trained against – as well as the “black box” holdout Facenet. Of note 

> 6Full table of results in Appendix 5

12 Lagogiannis et al. is the Moon ET which performed best overall – reducing the accuracy across models by an average of 93 .9% . These results align with the findings of [ 49 ] which also demonstrated lower attack transfer than that of PGD methods when trained against a single embedding model. Across all defenses under test, VGGFace2 [ 19 ] proved to be the most difficult embedding model to sabotage. 

Baseline LowKey Low Mid High 

> 0%
> 50%
> 100%

Fawkes 

Recall Rate in Face Verification 

ArcFace VGGFace Facenet 

> (a) Basline and Prior Defenses 0% 50% 100%
> ST

Dogpatch Moon Nashville Sutro  

> 0% 50% 100%
> ET
> (b) AuraMask -based Defenses 0% 50% 100%
> ST

Dogpatch Moon Nashville Sutro   

> 0% 50% 100%
> ET
> (c) Reference and Target Filtered 0% 50% 100%

Nashville Sutro 

> ST

Moon 

Dogpatch Moon Sutro 

> 0% 50% 100%

Dogpatch Moon Dogpatch ET   

> (d) Reference and Target Filtered with different defenses Fig. 4. LFW pairwise face verification recall using ArcFace, VGGFace2, Facenet embeddings across defenses.

4.3.2 Face Verification Recall. In Figure 4, we summarize the results of the comparative evaluation on the Labeled Faces in the Wild pairs benchmark 7.

> 7Full table of results in Appendix 5

AuraMask 13 With respect to face verification recall — i.e., correct positive predictions over the total number of true positives — we can see that both the ST and ET defenses are effective in reducing recall over the baseline. In particular, ETs are as effective as LowKey and outperform Fawkes across all tested face embeddings. The STs, on the other hand, are generally only effective in sabotaging verification with the targeted model (ArcFace) – a result that mirrors that of prior work on ATNs [49]. Next, consider Figure 4c, which illustrates the reduced protection when both images in a pair are obfuscated by the same defense. This means that an attacker with access to a reference image obfuscated by the same defense could negate the protection provided. However, in Figure 4d we can see that using a mix of defenses, especially with the ET, retains more protection. 

4.3.3 Perceptual Similarity. In Figure 5, we present the distribution of multiple commonly used perceptual similarity heuristics [ 91 ] – i.e., MSE, MAE, SSIM, LPIPS – and a more recent perceptual heuristic – TopIQ [ 22 ] – on the FDF testing subset. As expected, prior AFR defenses generate outputs that are more perceptually similar than our “aesthetic” defenses with perturbations introduced by LowKey [23] measured as the least perceptible. 

> 0.00
> 0.02
> 0.04
> 0.06

MSE 

> 0.00
> 0.05
> 0.10
> 0.15

MAE 

> 0.0
> 0.5

SSIM 

> 0.0
> 0.2
> 0.4
> 0.6

LPIPS 

> 0.4
> 0.6
> 0.8

TopIQ 

Dogpatch 

Moon 

Nashville 

Sutro 

Fawkes 

Lowkey 

> Fig. 5. Perceptual similarity assessment across defenses.

5 User Evaluation 

To address RQ3, we conducted a controlled study to evaluate user acceptance of AuraMask defenses relative to the baseline conditions. We collected user data across 𝑁 = 630 participants with a two-task survey wherein participants reported on the “acceptability” of outputs generated by a randomly selected defense using a validated scale — the Subversive AI Assessment (SAIA-8) [ 60 ]. In the first task, participants responded to the SAIA-8 scale across seven conditions [ 60 ]. In the second task, participants were asked to choose up to three from a set of fourteen AFR defenses — e.g., Figure 1 — that they would feel comfortable using on their own photos. Our analytical approach included a mix 14 Lagogiannis et al. of methods including one-way Analysis of Variance (ANOVA) [ 100 ], the Tukey test [ 106 ], and Plackett-Luce [ 107 ] to evaluate the relationship in user responses amongst the control, baseline defenses, and our aesthetic defenses. 

5.1 Conditions 

In this study, we evaluated a subset of the 80 defenses we generated with AuraMask as our focus was on measuring the difference in user acceptability between intentionally perceptible AFR defenses and prior approaches, not between the AuraMask defenses. Accordingly, we chose four AuraMask defenses for the first user task (rating acceptability on the SAIA-8 scale) and twelve for the second user task (top 3 preference selection). The subsets were chosen, in part, due to the diversity of effects they represent; for example, the four defenses used for the first task: Moon is black-and-white, Nashville and Dogpatch vary image warmth, and Sutro introduces shadows at the image border along with color variation. Finally, we only tested the Single-Target Defense (ST) variant in our user study — trained against ArcFace [28] — which had lower overall protection (see 4.2.2). 

5.1.1 Task 1: Self-Reported Acceptability. In the first task, we randomly assigned each participant one of seven conditions — i.e., Control (no change), Fawkes [95], LowKey [23], Dogpatch, Moon, Nashville, or Sutro. 

5.1.2 Task 2: Multi-Choice Grid Selection. In the second task, each participant was presented with fourteen defenses in a grid – 12 ST AuraMask -based defenses (see Figure 1) along with Fawkes and LowKey. 

5.2 Image Preparation 

We pre-applied defenses to a randomly sampled subset of 1K photos from the FDF test split across all aforementioned conditions. 

5.3 Survey Procedure 

Participants were recruited from Prolific 8 and paid $0.5 for a response, which took two minutes on average to complete. We had each participant respond to the SAIA-8 for an output generated by only one of the seven defenses, a between-subjects approach, to avoid order effects in the response. After informing the participant about the study and collecting consent per our IRB-approved study design, the participant was shown a side-by-side of an undefended image and the protected variant (matching the defense to which they were assigned, see 6). Then, we asked participants to consider the two images while responding to the SAIA-8, presented in randomized order. 

5.4 Study Iterations 

We ran two separate iterations of this study, both with a sample of 𝑁 = 315 participants based on a power analysis. Each iteration differed only in base image selection criteria. In the first iteration, we randomly selected a base image from the 1K FDF subset described above. In theory, random selection from this large set of images should mitigate any impact that image content or quality has on SAIA-8 reports. However, given that the FDF dataset includes blurry, dark, occluded, and non-human faces, we conducted a second iteration of the study with tighter controls on image content to ensure that the presented images had a clearly visible face. As a result, in the second iteration, we pre-selected five images from the 1K subset that contain forward facing, well lit, and human faces (see Figure 7). 

> 8https://prolific.com

AuraMask 15 

Fig. 6. Screenshot of survey instrument used for collection of SAIA-8 responses. 16 Lagogiannis et al. Control Fawkes LowKey Dogpatch Moon Nashville Sutro 

> Fig. 7. Five images selected for second iteration of SAIA-8 data collection.

5.5 Analytical Approach 

We analyzed data from both iterations with the same analytical approach. The SAIA-8 data from each iteration of the first task was analyzed with a one-way Analysis of Variance (ANOVA) [ 100 ] which tests for differences in means of the dependent variable amongst groups in the independent variable with significance achieved when 𝜌 ≤ 0.05 or 𝜌 ≤ 0.01 .We followed this up with a post-hoc pair-wise Tukey t-test [ 106 ] to measure statistical differences amongst the pairs of all seven conditions. This test is optimal for balanced groups – i.e., the same number of responses per condition – and provides a deeper understanding of which groups are statistically similar with respect to the dependent variable – i.e., SAIA-8. We fitted a Plackett-Luce [ 107 , 108 ] model to assess defense output preference in the grid selection task and used quasi-variance calculations (using the R qvcalc package) to obtain standard errors for all pairwise comparisons. The worth parameter represents each filter’s relative preference strength on a log scale, where higher values indicate greater preference. 

5.6 Results 

5.6.1 Acceptability (SAIA-8) Results. In our analysis of the data from both iterations of SAIA-8 responses, we found statistical significance both in measurable differences amongst all the groups and between pairs – see 4. In the both iterations, the ANOVA test showed a significant difference in the SAIA-8 scores amongst the seven conditions AuraMask 17 (𝜌 1 = 1.53 × 10 −18 and 𝜌 2 = 2.68 × 10 −16 ). We also measured the effect size for these conditions ( 𝜂 21 = 0.27 and 𝜂 22 = 0.24 ). Thus, our sample size of 𝑁 = 315 per iteration with seven groups and a targeted significance of 𝛼 = 0.01 achieved an approximate power of 1.0.To better understand the statistical relationships between defenses, we performed a post-hoc Tukey t-test [ 106 ]. We summarized the results in Table 2 for analysis between AuraMask -based defenses and prior approaches – i.e., Fawkes [ 95 ] and LowKey [ 23 ]. Of note in these results is the AuraMask -based defense that emulates the Moon filter. This 

> Originals
> Moon
> Sutro
> Nashville
> Dogpatch
> Fawkes
> Lowkey

0

10 

20 

30 

40 

> SAIA-8

# A B B B BC C C

> (a) Iteration 1
> Originals
> Moon
> Dogpatch
> Nashville
> Sutro
> Lowkey
> Fawkes

0

10 

20 

30 

40 

# A B BC BC BC CD D  

> (b) Iteration 2 Fig. 8. Distribution of SAIA-8 scores in each iteration with conditions grouped on statistical similarity ( 𝜌 >0.05 ).

black-and-white filter achieved significantly higher scores than both baselines across the two study iterations. The other AuraMask -based defenses we tested also achieved higher SAIA-8 scores than the baseline (see Figure 8), but the statistical significance of these differences varied across iteration. In iteration 1, Moon, Nashville and Sutro scored significantly higher than both Fawkes and LowKey, but Dogpatch did not. In iteration 2, all of our defenses scored significantly higher than Fawkes, but only Moon scored significantly higher than LowKey. Here, we use Compact Letter Display (CLD) to identify groups of pairs based on significance level – i.e., grouping for pairwise significance 𝜌 > 0.05 

(see 8). We also present raw statistical data of the pairwise test between the control group and obfuscation groups (see Table 2). Iteration 1 Iteration 2 A B 𝜌 Δ 𝜌 Δ

> Fawkes

Dogpatch 0.88 −1.72 4.65 e−3 −5.55 

Moon 3.18 e−4 −5.73 4.49 e−7 −8.68 

Nashville 1.98e −2 −4.42 9.75 e−3 −5.32 

Sutro 1.99e −2 −4.59 3.66e −2 −4.66 

> LowKey

Dogpatch 0.12 −3.88 0.19 −6.72 

Moon 6.99 e−7 −7.89 2.04 e−4 −3.36 

Nashville 1.28 e−4 −6.58 0.28 −2.70 

Sutro 1.52 e−4 −6.75 0.55 −3.13   

> Table 2. Pairwise analysis between SAIA-8 scores for defenses A and B with ( 𝜌 ≤0.01 ) results bolded.

18 Lagogiannis et al. 

Acceptable 

(SAIA) 

> Perceptible
> (LPIPS)

Control 

Fawkes 

Lowkey 

Dogpatch 

Moon Nashville 

Sutro  

> Less More
> Less  More

Original Prior Work AuraMask 

> Fig. 9. Defenses tested in the acceptability task, charted along user acceptability (x-axis) and similarity relative to the original image (y-axis). The Moon filter, despite being the most perceptually distinctive from the original (Control) image, was also rated as most acceptable amongst the obfuscated images users rated.

Perceptual similarity vs. Acceptability: In Figure 9, we plot overall the overall user acceptability of defenses against their perceptual similarity. LowKey has the highest perceptual similarity with the original unaltered image, but is amongst the least acceptable of the options we tested. In contrast, the Moon defense is both the most perceptually distinct from the original image and also the most user acceptable. In short, aiming for “perceptibly” aesthetic defenses seems more prudent for user acceptance than aiming for “imperceptibility” as has been the focus of prior approaches. 

5.6.2 Preference (Grid Selection) Results. Our analysis revealed distinct preference tiers within the grid-selection task responses. To identify groups of statistically equivalent defenses, we constructed a CLD using pairwise comparisons at 

𝛼 = 0.05 . In the CLD, only filters with no shared letters are significantly different. For example, filters labeled “AB” in Figure 10 form a bridge between groups A and B, being statistically indistinguishable from both groups whereas “A” and “B” are statistically distinguishable from each other. The Inkwell through Moon AuraMask defenses (CLD groups A to FG) were all significantly more preferred than Fawkes and Lowkey (groups IJ and HI, respectively). At the lower end of the preference spectrum, 1977 and Sierra (groups LM and KL) were significantly less preferred than the majority of filters. The top-tier defenses – Moon, Amaro, and Sutro (groups A and AB) – showed the strongest preferences, with Moon having the highest worth parameter (log-worth = 1.44 , worth = 4.21 ). In all, our results demonstrate that AuraMask -based defenses were significantly more user acceptable and preferable than Fawkes and LowKey. 

6 Discussion 

In this work, we sought to uncover how we can design anti-facial recognition defenses to better align with people’s aethetic and self-presentation preferences . We introduced an extensible pipeline — AuraMask — which aimed to ease development of AFR defenses that are both adversarially effective and improve user acceptance. Through AuraMask , we generated a set of 80 novel defenses – 40 Single-Target Defense (ST) and 40 Ensemble-Target Defense (ET) – that serve as a proof-of-concept ( RQ1 ) for incorporating “aesthetics” into AFR defenses. In our comparative technical evaluation AuraMask 19 

> Fig. 10. Plackett-Luce worth parameters for the grid preference selection task, grouped using pairwise statistical comparisons. Higher values indicate greater preference. Options that do not share a letter are significantly different; those that do share a letter are not.

(RQ2 ), we demonstrated strong technical performance. The ETs outperformed previous methods – Fawkes [ 95 ] and LowKey [ 23 ] – on all tested facial recognition models, while the STs did the same against the targeted model (but were weaker against untargeted models). Moreover, our user-study ( RQ3 ) suggests that users find “aesthetic” defenses more acceptable than and preferable to prior work. 

6.1 Are AFR defenses ethical and appropriate? 

There is debate within the Security and Privacy community on whether user-facing AFR technologies is appropriate to address facial recognition harms. Critics have argued that AFR defenses fail to provide strong protective guarantees and may thus endanger users by creating a false sense of security [83]. This critique is valid, but assumes a traditional security model where defenders possess power and resources equal to or greater than assumed attackers. We argue that AFR filters should instead be understood as resistance technologies 

[ 1]: tools deployed by under-powered groups (e.g., individual citizens) to protect themselves from powerful threat actors (e.g., governments and corporations using facial recognition). When defenders are under-resourced relative to attackers, absolute guarantees of protection are often neither possible nor reasonable. Instead, following Brunton and Nissenbaum’s framework of obfuscation as a “weapon of the weak” [ 15 ], we evaluate these technologies against different goals: providing cover, buying time, enabling deniability, and expressing protest. Consider a user, Johnny, who wishes to maintain both a professional online presence and participate in political activism. Even if institutions or third-parties capture unprotected reference images of Johnny through CCTV or bystander photography, aesthetic AFR filters still offer meaningful protection across multiple dimensions: 

Providing Cover : When Johnny applies obfuscation defenses to his online images, unobfuscated reference images captured in the physical world will have low probability of matching against his obfuscated posts. This mismatch provides cover for his online activities, particularly on platforms where he engages in activism under pseudonyms. 

Buying Time : While sophisticated adversaries may possess countermeasures (or created obfuscated reference images to break these obfuscations), doing so requires individual analyst attention and scrutiny. This added friction 20 Lagogiannis et al. reduces the effectiveness of mass surveillance systems designed to process millions of faces automatically, buying Johnny and others time before their accounts are identified and monitored. 

Deniability : Unlike prior defenses that introduce artifacts unaligned with human aesthetic preferences (e.g., Fawkes [ 95 ]) or destructive obfuscations (e.g., blurring), aesthetic defenses provide plausible deniability. If confronted about images obfuscated with AuraMask defenses, Johnny can credibly claim he simply likes how the filters look. This aesthetic plausibility distinguishes our approach from methods whose protective intent is undeniable. 

Expressing Protest : Beyond individual protection, widespread adoption of AFR filters serves as measurable resistance against surveillance systems. As ACLU lawyer Ashley Gorski argues, quantifying how many people take evasive action against surveillance provides concrete evidence of harm when advocating for legal redress [ 35 ]. Each visibly filtered image becomes both protection and protest. These goals represent meaningful victories for under-powered defenders, even if they do not provide absolute guarantees. Thus, as long as users receive adequate risk communication about the limitations and strengths of these tools, and use these tools as one of a broader suite of protection strategies [ 25 ], we argue that developing and deploying resistance technologies such as aesthetic AuraMask defenses remains both necessary and important. 

6.2 Can two AFR-filtered images be correctly matched to one another? 

AuraMask makes it so an obfuscated photo of Johnny isn’t recognized as being the same person as an unobfuscated photo of Johnny. But what about two obfuscated photos of Johnny? Would they both be identifiable as the same Johnny? In the context of an institution searching for social media presence, Johnny may be identifiable if the reference image is obfuscated with the same protective filter. Indeed, Figure 4c demonstrates this concern as a distinct possibility as face verification recall improves when comparing two images protected with the same defense. While an adversary can themselves apply an obfuscation to a reference image, consider how in this paper we present 40 unique defenses – 80 if we consider both configurations – with different visual attributes and that the AuraMask pipeline allows for the creation of boundless numbers of other such defenses. This provides several choices for obfuscation before sharing, all of which are trained separately and are unlikely to move to the same position in the 𝑁 -dimensional face embedding space. Figure 4d illustrates how choice in obfuscation could provide greater protection against facial recognition systems even when both images are protected. The large number of defenses that can be created with AuraMask points the way to future “one-time pad” style obfuscations that users can dynamically apply. We note, however, that the security of this scheme should be tested. 

6.3 New Horizons for “Aesthetically Perceptible” Obfuscation 

We began this work by detailing the AuraMask pipeline for training multi-task AFR defenses and describing how we used it to generate Instagram filter-like defenses. These defenses were utilized to investigate the impact of relaxing the perceptibility constraint in both user acceptance and technical efficacy. In our evaluations, we found our defenses were successful in sabotaging face verification and achieved higher measures of user acceptance than approaches that optimized imperceptibility. However, there remains much to explore in this design space and the defenses we presented here are only the “tip of the iceberg.” Indeed, the evaluated obfuscations have room for improvement – e.g., ETs are more protective but introduce structurally severe perturbations (see Figure 1). Moreover, the “aesthetic” heuristics we use in this work are simplistic when compared to other methods in computer vision and computational photography – e.g., style transfer [ 16 , 117 ], heuristics for image aesthetics [ 22 , 103 ], or emulating expert adjustments [ 17 , 44 , 105 ]– which can go beyond simple emulation. More artistically-inclined developers may find ways to incorporate AML AuraMask 21 perturbations in ways we have not considered. In short, eschewing the perceptibility constraint from AML research unlocks the potential for a large ecosystem of creative AFR defenses that may be accelerated by the AuraMask toolkit. 

7 Limitations 

First, in our user study, we only used the STs that have less obfuscation strength than ET. We opted for STs as ET outputs introduced more structural alterations that alter the nose or introduce “ghost” features around the subject (see Figure 1). While the ET configuration outperforms prior systems and successfully emulates Instagram filters, we assumed the structural artifacts would not align with preferred presentation. We leave tuning of the Ensemble configuration for less structural alterations to future work. Second, participants were asked to respond to the SAIA-8 with pre-obfuscated images of third-party subjects as opposed to personal photos, potentially biasing scores. We took this approach as the PGD-based approaches – [ 95 ]and [ 23 ] – can take up to 15 minutes, likely dis-incentivizing participation. Furthermore, we expect that requiring participants to upload a personal photo would potentially bias our sample in other ways — many privacy-conscious participants may be apprehensive. Further evaluation is warranted, especially in a field context with users obfuscating personal photos. Moreover, given our findings here, perhaps these PGD methods no longer need to be considered in future evaluations. Finally, neither Fawkes nor LowKey remain state-of-the-art with several ostensibly user-facing obfuscations published since [ 21 , 49 , 114 ]. Unfortunately, many of these newer obfuscations have not open-sourced their code; Fawkes and LowKey, to their great credit, have more accessible codebases. For our part, we freely provide not only the AuraMask 

source-code but also pre-trained models for comparative evaluation at https://hf.co/collections/logasja/auramask. 

8 Conclusion 

In this work, we present a novel toolkit – AuraMask – that can create AFR image defenses that are both adversarially effective and aesthetically pleasing. We used AuraMask to generate 80 “aesthetic” AFR defenses for a technical and user-centered evaluation. Our experimental results demonstrated that AuraMask defenses achieve similar – and at times better – protection against face verification than current baselines, reducing face verification recall by as much as 99% . In addition, our user-study results demonstrated that the output of AurMask defenses achieve significantly higher user acceptance over prior work, and were more frequently preferred than baseline methods. One defense of note emulated the “Moon” Instagram filter, achieving the highest user preference and performing best against all facial recognition models tested. AuraMask enables the exploration of infinitely many new “aesthetic” AFR defenses that may be more in line with users’ self-presentation preferences and thus more likely to see widespread use. To help accelerate this exploration by those both within and outside Security and Privacy (S&P), we fully open source AuraMask . 9

Acknowledgments 

This work was supported, in part, by the National Science Foundation (NSF) under SaTC Award No. 2316287. 

References    

> [1] William Agnew, Kevin R McKee, I Gabriel, J Kay, W Isaac, AS Bergman, S El-Sayed, and S Mohamed. 2023. Technologies of Resistance to AI. Equity and Access in Algorithms, Mechanisms, and Optimization (2023), 1–13.
> 9Available here: https://gitlab.com/raccs-lab/auramask-library

22 Lagogiannis et al. 

[2] Shane Ahern, Dean Eckles, Nathaniel S. Good, Simon King, Mor Naaman, and Rahul Nair. 2007. Over-Exposed? Privacy Patterns and Considerations in Online and Mobile Photo Sharing. In Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems (CHI ’07) . Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 357–366. doi:10/dhkjj4 [3] Naveed Akhtar and Ajmal Mian. 2018. Threat of Adversarial Attacks on Deep Learning in Computer Vision: A Survey. IEEE Access 6 (Feb. 2018), 14410–14430. arXiv:1801.00553 doi:10/gfxzrs [4] Md Zahangir Alom, Mahmudul Hasan, Chris Yakopcic, Tarek M. Taha, and Vijayan K. Asari. 2018. Recurrent Residual Convolutional Neural Network Based on U-Net (R2U-Net) for Medical Image Segmentation. arXiv:1802.06955 [cs] doi:10.48550/arXiv.1802.06955 [5] Mary Jean Amon, Rakibul Hasan, Kurt Hugenberg, Bennett I. Bertenthal, and Apu Kapadia. 2020. Influencing Photo Sharing Decisions on Social Media: A Case of Paradoxical Findings. In 2020 IEEE Symposium on Security and Privacy (SP) (IEEE Symposium on Security and Privacy 2020) . IEEE, San Francisco, CA, USA, 1350–1366. doi:10/gmbpwp [6] N. D. Amsden, L. Chen, and X. Yuan. 2014. Transmitting Hidden Information Using Steganography via Facebook. In Fifth International Conference on Computing, Communications and Networking Technologies (ICCCNT) . 1–7. doi:10/gsnqr9 [7] Saeideh Bakhshi, David Shamma, Lyndon Kennedy, and Eric Gilbert. 2015. Why We Filter Our Photos and How It Impacts Engagement. Proceedings of the International AAAI Conference on Web and Social Media 9, 1 (2015), 12–21. doi:10/gsnqvd [8] Shumeet Baluja and Ian Fischer. 2017. Adversarial Transformation Networks: Learning to Generate Adversarial Examples. arXiv:1703.09387 [cs] doi:10.48550/arXiv.1703.09387 [9] Beth T. Bell. 2019. “You Take Fifty Photos, Delete Forty Nine and Use One”: A Qualitative Study of Adolescent Image-Sharing Practices on Social Media. International Journal of Child-Computer Interaction 20 (June 2019), 64–71. doi:10/gjvm4p [10] Sam Biddle. 2020. Police Surveilled George Floyd Protests With Help From Twitter-Affiliated Startup Dataminr. https://theintercept.com/2020/07/09/twitter-dataminr-police-spy-surveillance-black-lives-matter-protests/. [11] Russell Brandom. 2016. Facebook, Twitter, and Instagram Surveillance Tool Was Used to Arrest Baltimore Protestors. https://www.theverge.com/2016/10/11/13243890/facebook-twitter-instagram-police-surveillance-geofeedia-api. [12] Kat Brewster, Aloe DeGuia, and Samuel Mayworm. 2025. "That Moment of Curiosity": Augmented Reality Face Filters for Transgender Identity Exploration, Gender Affirmation, and Radical Possibility. (2025). [13] André Brock. 2012. From the Blackhand Side: Twitter as a Cultural Conversation. Journal of Broadcasting & Electronic Media 56, 4 (Oct. 2012), 529–549. doi:10/gddxwm [14] Simone Browne. 2015. Dark Matters: On the Surveillance of Blackness . Duke University Press. [15] Finn Brunton and Helen Fay Nissenbaum. 2015. Obfuscation: A User’s Guide for Privacy and Protest . MIT Press, Cambridge, Massachusetts. [16] Nhat-Tan Bui, Ngoc-Thao Nguyen, and Xuan-Nam Cao. 2022. Structure-Aware Photorealistic Style Transfer Using Ghost Bottlenecks. In Pattern Recognition and Artificial Intelligence , Mounîm El Yacoubi, Eric Granger, Pong Chi Yuen, Umapada Pal, and Nicole Vincent (Eds.). Springer International Publishing, Cham, 15–24. doi:10/gtpk4k [17] Vladimir Bychkovsky, Sylvain Paris, Eric Chan, and Frédo Durand. 2011. Learning Photographic Global Tonal Adjustment with a Database of Input / Output Image Pairs. In The Twenty-Fourth IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition .[18] Paul Byron, Brady Robards, Benjamin Hanckel, Son Vivienne, and Brendan Churchill. 2019. "Hey, I’m Having These Experiences": Tumblr Use and Young People’s Queer (Dis)Connections. International Journal of Communication 13 (2019), 2239–2259. [19] Qiong Cao, Li Shen, Weidi Xie, Omkar M Parkhi, and Andrew Zisserman. 2018. Vggface2: A Dataset for Recognising Faces across Pose and Age. In 

2018 13th IEEE International Conference on Automatic Face & Gesture Recognition (FG 2018) . IEEE, 67–74. [20] Nathalie Casemajor, Stéphane Couture, Mauricio Delfin, Matthew Goerzen, and Alessandro Delfanti. 2015. Non-Participation in Digital Media: Toward a Framework of Mediated Political Action. Media, Culture & Society 37, 6 (Sept. 2015), 850–866. doi:10/gndhkm [21] Varun Chandrasekaran, Chuhan Gao, Brian Tang, Kassem Fawaz, Somesh Jha, and Suman Banerjee. 2021. Face-Off: Adversarial Face Obfuscation. 

Proceedings on Privacy Enhancing Technologies 2021, 2 (April 2021), 369–390. doi:10/gsnqn2 [22] Chaofeng Chen, Jiadi Mo, Jingwen Hou, Haoning Wu, Liang Liao, Wenxiu Sun, Qiong Yan, and Weisi Lin. 2023. TOPIQ: A Top-down Approach from Semantics to Distortions for Image Quality Assessment. arXiv:2308.03060 doi:10.48550/arXiv.2308.03060 [23] Valeriia Cherepanova, Micah Goldblum, Harrison Foley, Shiyuan Duan, John Dickerson, Gavin Taylor, and Tom Goldstein. 2021. LowKey: Leveraging Adversarial Attacks to Protect Social Media Users from Facial Recognition. arXiv:2101.07922 [cs] (Jan. 2021). arXiv:2101.07922 [cs] [24] Mitchell Church, Ravi Thambusamy, and Hamid Nemati. 2020. User Misrepresentation in Online Social Networks: How Competition and Altruism Impact Online Disclosure Behaviours. Behaviour & Information Technology 39, 12 (Dec. 2020), 1320–1340. doi:10/gpbrfj [25] Sauvik Das. 2020. Subversive AI: Resisting Automated Algorithmic Surveillance with Human-Centered Adversarial Machine Learning. In Resistance AI Workshop at NeurIPS . 4. [26] Julia Davies. 2007. Display, Identity and the Everyday: Self-presentation through Online Image Sharing. Discourse: studies in the cultural politics of education 28, 4 (2007), 549–564. doi:10/c99wtk [27] Mauricio Delbracio, Damien Kelly, Michael S. Brown, and Peyman Milanfar. 2021. Mobile Computational Photography: A Tour. Annual Review of Vision Science 7, 1 (2021), 571–604. doi:10/gmx68q [28] Jiankang Deng, Jia Guo, Niannan Xue, and Stefanos Zafeiriou. 2019. Arcface: Additive Angular Margin Loss for Deep Face Recognition. In 

Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition . 4690–4699. AuraMask 23 

[29] Foivos I. Diakogiannis, François Waldner, Peter Caccetta, and Chen Wu. 2020. ResUNet-a: A Deep Learning Framework for Semantic Segmentation of Remotely Sensed Data. ISPRS Journal of Photogrammetry and Remote Sensing 162 (April 2020), 94–114. doi:10.1016/j.isprsjprs.2020.01.013 [30] Angel Diaz. 2019. New York City Police Department Surveillance Technology . Technical Report. Brennan Center for Justice. [31] Paul Dourish, Rebecca E. Grinter, Jessica Delgado de la Flor, and Melissa Joseph. 2004. Security in the Wild: User Strategies for Managing Security as an Everyday, Practical Problem. Personal and Ubiquitous Computing 8, 6 (Nov. 2004), 391–401. doi:10/dw9f76 [32] Ádám Erdélyi, Thomas Winkler, and Bernhard Rinner. 2013. Serious Fun: Cartooning for Privacy Protection.. In Proceedings of the MediaEval 2013 Multimedia Benchmark Workshop, Barcelona, Spain, October 18-19, 2013. (MediaEval 2013) .[33] Yihua Fan, Yongzhen Wang, Dong Liang, Yiping Chen, Haoran Xie, Fu Lee Wang, Jonathan Li, and Mingqiang Wei. 2024. Low-FaceNet: Face Recognition-Driven Low-Light Image Enhancement. IEEE Transactions on Instrumentation and Measurement 73 (2024), 1–13. doi:10.1109/TIM.2024. 3372230 [34] Jesse Fox and Megan A. Vendemia. 2016. Selective Self-Presentation and Social Comparison Through Photographs on Social Networking Sites. 

Cyberpsychology, Behavior, and Social Networking 19, 10 (Oct. 2016), 593–600. doi:10/ghcbdf [35] Ashley Gorski. 2022. The Biden Administration’s SIGINT Executive Order, Part II: Redress for Unlawful Surveillance. Just Security (2022). [36] Mitchell Gray. 2003. Urban Surveillance and Panopticism: Will We Recognize the Facial Recognition Society? Surveillance & Society 1, 3 (2003), 314–330. doi:10/gs42bb [37] Cory Hallam and Gianluca Zanella. 2017. Online Self-Disclosure: The Privacy Paradox Explained as a Temporally Discounted Balance between Concerns and Rewards. Computers in Human Behavior 68 (March 2017), 217–227. doi:10/f9nv3s [38] Daniel A Hanley and Sally Hubbard. 2020. Eyes Everywhere: Amazon’s Surveillance Infrastructure and Revitalizing Worker Power. Open Markets Institute (2020). [39] Rakibul Hasan, Bennett I. Bertenthal, Kurt Hugenberg, and Apu Kapadia. 2021. Your Photo Is so Funny That I Don’t Mind Violating Your Privacy by Sharing It: Effects of Individual Humor Styles on Online Photo-sharing Behaviors. In Proceedings of the 2021 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems . ACM, Yokohama Japan, 1–14. doi:10/gsnqs5 [40] Rakibul Hasan, Eman Hassan, Yifang Li, Kelly Caine, David J. Crandall, Roberto Hoyle, and Apu Kapadia. 2018. Viewer Experience of Obscuring Scene Elements in Photos to Enhance Privacy. In Proceedings of the 2018 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems (CHI ’18) .Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 1–13. doi:10/gfkr9s [41] Eman T. Hassan, Rakibul Hasan, Patrick Shaffer, David Crandall, and Apu Kapadia. 2017. Cartooning for Enhanced Privacy in Lifelogging and Streaming Videos. In 2017 IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition Workshops (CVPRW) (CVPR 2017) . IEEE, Honolulu, HI, USA, 1333–1342. doi:10/gg2g6q [42] J. He, B. Liu, D. Kong, X. Bao, N. Wang, H. Jin, and G. Kesidis. 2016. PUPPIES: Transformation-Supported Personalized Privacy Preserving Partial Image Sharing. In 2016 46th Annual IEEE/IFIP International Conference on Dependable Systems and Networks (DSN) . 359–370. doi:10/gsnqqm [43] Kashmir Hill. 2020. This Tool Could Protect Your Photos From Facial Recognition. The New York Times (Aug. 2020). [44] Man M. Ho and Jinjia Zhou. 2021. Deep Preset: Blending and Retouching Photos with Color Style Transfer. arXiv:2007.10701 [cs, eess] doi:10.48550/arXiv.2007.10701 [45] Seoyeon Hong, Mi R. Jahng, Namyeon Lee, and Kevin R. Wise. 2020. Do You Filter Who You Are?: Excessive Self-Presentation, Social Cues, and User Evaluations of Instagram Selfies. Computers in Human Behavior 104 (March 2020), 106159. doi:10/gnfnbd [46] Yuheng Hu, Lydia Manikonda, and Subbarao Kambhampati. 2014. What We Instagram: A First Analysis of Instagram Photo Content and User Types. Proceedings of the International AAAI Conference on Web and Social Media 8, 1 (May 2014), 595–598. doi:10/gr739d [47] Gary B Huang, Marwan Mattar, Tamara Berg, and Eric Learned-Miller. 2008. Labeled Faces in the Wild: A Database Forstudying Face Recognition in Unconstrained Environments. In Workshop on Faces in’Real-Life’Images: Detection, Alignment, and Recognition .[48] Håkon Hukkelås, Rudolf Mester, and Frank Lindseth. 2019. DeepPrivacy: A Generative Adversarial Network for Face Anonymization. In Advances in Visual Computing (Lecture Notes in Computer Science, Vol. 11844) , George Bebis, Richard Boyle, Bahram Parvin, Darko Koracin, Daniela Ushizima, Sek Chai, Shinjiro Sueda, Xin Lin, Aidong Lu, Daniel Thalmann, Chaoli Wang, and Panpan Xu (Eds.). Springer International Publishing, Cham, 565–578. doi:10/gsqgrf [49] Shehzeen Hussain, Todd Huster, Chris Mesterharm, Paarth Neekhara, and Farinaz Koushanfar. 2023. ReFace: Adversarial Transformation Networks for Real-time Attacks on Face Recognition Systems. In 2023 53rd Annual IEEE/IFIP International Conference on Dependable Systems and Networks (DSN) . 302–312. doi:10/gstdzq [50] Sergio Ibáñez-Sánchez, Carlos Orús, and Carlos Flavián. 2022. Augmented Reality Filters on Social Media. Analyzing the Drivers of Playability Based on Uses and Gratifications Theory. Psychology & Marketing 39, 3 (March 2022), 559–578. doi:10/gpbsqv [51] Panagiotis Ilia, Iasonas Polakis, Elias Athanasopoulos, Federico Maggi, and Sotiris Ioannidis. 2015. Face/Off: Preventing Privacy Leakage from Photos in Social Networks. In Proceedings of the 22nd ACM SIGSAC Conference on Computer and Communications Security (CCS ’15) . Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 781–792. doi:10/ggvf2j [52] Ana Javornik, Ben Marder, Jennifer Brannon Barhorst, Graeme McLean, Yvonne Rogers, Paul Marshall, and Luk Warlop. 2022. ‘What Lies behind the Filter?’ Uncovering the Motivations for Using Augmented Reality (AR) Face Filters on Social Media and Their Effect on Well-Being. Computers in Human Behavior 128 (March 2022), 107126. doi:10/gsnqst [53] Nicola Jones. 2024. The AI Revolution Is Running out of Data. What Can Researchers Do? Nature 636, 8042 (Dec. 2024), 290–292. doi:10.1038/d41586-024-03990-2 24 Lagogiannis et al. 

[54] Alex Krizhevsky, Ilya Sutskever, and Geoffrey E Hinton. 2012. ImageNet Classification with Deep Convolutional Neural Networks. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , Vol. 25. Curran Associates, Inc. [55] Isadora Krsek, Anubha Kabra, Yao Dou, Tarek Naous, Laura A Dabbish, Alan Ritter, Wei Xu, and Sauvik Das. 2025. Measuring, Modeling, and Helping People Account for Privacy Risks in Online Self-Disclosures with AI. Proceedings of the ACM on Human-Computer Interaction 9, 2 (2025), 1–31. [56] Keith Laidler. 2008. Surveillance Unlimited : How We’ve Become the Most Watched People on Earth . Cambridge [England] : Icon Books Ltd. : Distributed in the UK by TBS Ltd. [57] Erik Learned-Miller, Gary B. Huang, Aruni RoyChowdhury, Haoxiang Li, and Gang Hua. 2016. Labeled Faces in the Wild: A Survey. In Advances in Face Detection and Facial Image Analysis , Michal Kawulok, M. Emre Celebi, and Bogdan Smolka (Eds.). Springer International Publishing, Cham, 189–248. doi:10.1007/978-3-319-25958-1_8 [58] Bin Li, Junhui He, Jiwu Huang, and Yun Qing Shi. 2011. A Survey on Image Steganography and Steganalysis. J. Inf. Hiding Multim. Signal Process. 

2, 2 (April 2011), 142–172. [59] Yifang Li, Nishant Vishwamitra, Hongxin Hu, Bart P. Knijnenburg, and Kelly Caine. 2017. Effectiveness and Users’ Experience of Face Blurring as a Privacy Protection for Sharing Photos via Online Social Networks. Proceedings of the Human Factors and Ergonomics Society Annual Meeting 61, 1 (Sept. 2017), 803–807. doi:10/gsnqnk [60] Jacob Logas, Poojita Garg, Rosa I. Arriaga, and Sauvik Das. 2024. The Subversive AI Acceptance Scale (SAIA-8): A Scale to Measure User Acceptance of AI-generated, Privacy-Enhancing Image Modifications. Proc. ACM Hum.-Comput. Interact. 8, CSCW1, Article 185 (April 2024). doi:10.1145/3641024 [61] Jacob Logas, Ari Schlesinger, Zhouyu Li, and Sauvik Das. 2022. Image DePO: Towards Gradual Decentralization of Online Social Networks Using Decentralized Privacy Overlays. Proceedings of the ACM on Human-Computer Interaction 6, CSCW1 (March 2022), 1–28. doi:10/gsnqpm [62] Ilya Loshchilov and Frank Hutter. 2019. Decoupled Weight Decay Regularization. arXiv:1711.05101 [cs] doi:10.48550/arXiv.1711.05101 [63] Katerina Lup, Leora Trub, and Lisa Rosenthal. 2015. Instagram #Instasad?: Exploring Associations Among Instagram Use, Depressive Symptoms, Negative Social Comparison, and Strangers Followed. Cyberpsychology, Behavior, and Social Networking 18, 5 (May 2015), 247–252. doi:10.1089/ cyber.2014.0560 [64] Ryan Mac, Caroline Haskins, and Logan McDonald. 2020. Clearview’s Facial Recognition App Has Been Used By The Justice Department, ICE, Macy’s, Walmart, And The NBA. https://www.buzzfeednews.com/article/ryanmac/clearview-ai-fbi-ice-global-law-enforcement. [65] Penousal Machado and Amilcar Cardoso. 1998. Computing Aesthetics. In Advances in Artificial Intelligence (Lecture Notes in Computer Science) ,Flávio Moreira de Oliveira (Ed.). Springer, Berlin, Heidelberg, 219–228. doi:10/dnwxc3 [66] Aleksander Madry, Aleksandar Makelov, Ludwig Schmidt, Dimitris Tsipras, and Adrian Vladu. 2019. Towards Deep Learning Models Resistant to Adversarial Attacks. arXiv:1706.06083 [cs, stat] (Sept. 2019). arXiv:1706.06083 [cs, stat] [67] I. Manokha. 2018. Surveillance, Panopticism, and Self-Discipline in the Digital Age. Surveillance and Society 16, 2 (2018). doi:10/gg4sxm [68] Sanya Mansoor. 2025. Pro-Palestinian Activists under Increased Surveillance on Massachusetts Campuses. https://www.wgbh.org/news/local/2025-03-24/pro-palestinian-activists-under-increased-surveillance-on-massachusetts-campuses. [69] Filippo Menczer and Thomas Hills. 2020. The Attention Economy. Scientific American 323, 6 (2020), 54–61. [70] Fausto Milletari, Nassir Navab, and Seyed-Ahmad Ahmadi. 2016. V-Net: Fully Convolutional Neural Networks for Volumetric Medical Image Segmentation. arXiv:1606.04797 [cs.CV] [71] Amar Kumar Mohapatra, Kamal Kumar, and Shubha Swarup. 2025. A Comparative Review and Performance Benchmarking of Face Recognition. 

Proceedings of Data Analytics and Management: ICDAM 2025, Volume 5 5 (2025), 320. [72] Kyzyl Monteiro, Yuchen Wu, and Sauvik Das. 2025. Imago Obscura: An Image Privacy AI Co-Pilot to Enable Identification and Mitigation of Risks. In Proceedings of the 38th Annual ACM Symposium on User Interface Software and Technology . 1–26. [73] Anne Oeldorf-Hirsch and S. Shyam Sundar. 2016. Social and Technological Motivations for Online Photo Sharing. Journal of Broadcasting & Electronic Media 60, 4 (Oct. 2016), 624–642. doi:10/gsnfbs [74] Ozan Oktay, Jo Schlemper, Loic Le Folgoc, Matthew Lee, Mattias Heinrich, Kazunari Misawa, Kensaku Mori, Steven McDonagh, Nils Y. Hammerla, Bernhard Kainz, Ben Glocker, and Daniel Rueckert. 2018. Attention U-Net: Learning Where to Look for the Pancreas. arXiv:1804.03999 [cs] doi:10.48550/arXiv.1804.03999 [75] Omkar M. Parkhi, Andrea Vedaldi, and Andrew Zisserman. 2015. Deep Face Recognition. In Procedings of the British Machine Vision Conference 2015 . British Machine Vision Association, Swansea, 41.1–41.12. doi:10/gf7pj3 [76] Sarah Parvini, Garance Burke, and Jesse Bedayn. 2024. Surveillance Tech Advances by Biden Could Aid in Trump’s Promised Crackdown on Immigration. https://apnews.com/article/artificial-intelligence-ai-deportation-biden-trump-immigration-0a0c2387762a7342af5668660f0391b5. [77] Yilang Peng. 2017. Time Travel with One Click: Effects of Digital Filters on Perceptions of Photographs. In Proceedings of the 2017 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems (CHI ’17) . Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 6000–6011. doi:10/gsnqr2 [78] Penousal Machado, Juan Romero, and Bill Z. Manaris. 2008. Experiments in Computational Aesthetics.. In The Art of Artificial Evolution 2008 (Natural Computing Series) . Springer, Berlin, Heidelberg, 381–415. doi:10/bkrcv3 [79] Daniela Petrelli and Steve Whittaker. 2010. Family Memories in the Home: Contrasting Physical and Digital Mementos. Personal and Ubiquitous Computing 14, 2 (Feb. 2010), 153–169. doi:10.1007/s00779-009-0279-7 AuraMask 25 

[80] Jeffrey G. Proudfoot, David Wilson, Joseph S. Valacich, and Michael D. Byrd. 2018. Saving Face on Facebook: Privacy Concerns, Social Benefits, and Impression Management. Behaviour & Information Technology 37, 1 (Jan. 2018), 16–37. doi:10/gg6cxt [81] Anthony Quintano. 2019. Mark Zuckerberg F8 2019 Keynote. [82] Moo-Ryong Ra, Ramesh Govindan, and Antonio Ortega. 2013. P3: Toward Privacy-Preserving Photo Sharing.. In Proceedings of the 10th USENIX Symposium on Networked Systems Design and Implementation, NSDI 2013, Lombard, IL, USA, April 2-5, 2013 (NSDI 2013) . 515–528. [83] Evani Radiya-Dixit and Florian Tramèr. 2021. Data Poisoning Won’t Save You From Facial Recognition. arXiv:2106.14851 [cs] (June 2021). arXiv:2106.14851 [cs] [84] Robin Rombach, Andreas Blattmann, Dominik Lorenz, Patrick Esser, and Björn Ommer. 2022. High-Resolution Image Synthesis with Latent Diffusion Models. arXiv:2112.10752 [cs] doi:10.48550/arXiv.2112.10752 [85] Olaf Ronneberger, Philipp Fischer, and Thomas Brox. 2015. U-Net: Convolutional Networks for Biomedical Image Segmentation. In Medical Image Computing and Computer-Assisted Intervention – MICCAI 2015 , Nassir Navab, Joachim Hornegger, William M. Wells, and Alejandro F. Frangi (Eds.). Springer International Publishing, Cham, 234–241. [86] Meredith Salisbury and Jefferson D. Pooley. 2017. The #nofilter Self: The Contest for Authenticity among Social Networking Sites, 2002–2016. 

Social Sciences 6, 1 (March 2017), 10. doi:10.3390/socsci6010010 [87] Ilyssa Salomon and Christia Spears Brown. 2021. That Selfie Becomes You: Examining Taking and Posting Selfies as Forms of Self-Objectification. 

Media Psychology 24, 6 (Nov. 2021), 847–865. doi:10/gndjh2 [88] Morgan Klaus Scheuerman, Kandrea Wade, Caitlin Lustig, and Jed R. Brubaker. 2020. How We’ve Taught Algorithms to See Identity: Constructing Race and Gender in Image Databases for Facial Analysis. Proceedings of the ACM on Human-Computer Interaction 4, CSCW1 (May 2020), 058:1–058:35. doi:10/gnjnzd [89] Florian Schroff, Dmitry Kalenichenko, and James Philbin. 2015. FaceNet: A Unified Embedding for Face Recognition and Clustering. In Proceedings of the IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition . 815–823. [90] Evan Selinger and Woodrow Hartzog. 2020. The Inconsentability of Facial Surveillance Consentability Symposium. Loyola Law Review 66, 1 (2020), 33–54. [91] Ayon Sen, Xiaojin Zhu, Erin Marshall, and Robert Nowak. 2020. Popular Imperceptibility Measures in Visual Adversarial Attacks Are Far from Human Perception. In Decision and Game Theory for Security (Lecture Notes in Computer Science) , Quanyan Zhu, John S. Baras, Radha Poovendran, and Juntao Chen (Eds.). Springer International Publishing, Cham, 188–199. doi:10/gsnqqh [92] Sefik Serengil and Alper Ozpinar. 2024. A Benchmark of Facial Recognition Pipelines and Co-Usability Performances of Modules. Journal of Information Technologies 17, 2 (2024), 95–107. doi:10.17671/gazibtd.1399077 [93] Sefik Ilkin Serengil and Alper Ozpinar. 2020. LightFace: A Hybrid Deep Face Recognition Framework. In 2020 Innovations in Intelligent Systems and Applications Conference (ASYU) . IEEE, Istanbul, Turkey, 1–5. doi:10.1109/ASYU50717.2020.9259802 [94] Yingkai Sha. 2021. Keras-Unet-Collection. GitHub. doi:10.5281/zenodo.5449801 [95] Shawn Shan, Emily Wenger, Jiayun Zhang, Huiying Li, Haitao Zheng, and Ben Y Zhao. 2020. Fawkes: Protecting Privacy against Unauthorized Deep Learning Models.. In 29th USENIX Security Symposium, USENIX Security 2020, August 12-14, 2020 (USENIX Security Symposium 2020) . 1589–1604. [96] Katie Shepherd. 2020. An Artist Stopped Posting Protest Photos Online to Shield Activists from Police. Then, He Was Arrested. Washington Post 

(Aug. 2020). [97] YiChang Shih, Sylvain Paris, Connelly Barnes, William T. Freeman, and Fredo Durand. 2014. Style Transfer for Headshot Portraits. MIT web domain (July 2014). [98] Shumeet Baluja. 2017. Hiding Images in Plain Sight: Deep Steganography.. In NIPS 2017 . Curran Associates, Inc., 2069–2079. [99] Brian Solis. 2008. SXSW Mark Zuckerberg Keynote -. [100] Lars St, Svante Wold, et al. 1989. Analysis of Variance (ANOVA). Chemometrics and intelligent laboratory systems 6, 4 (1989), 259–272. [101] Christian Szegedy, Wojciech Zaremba, Ilya Sutskever, Joan Bruna, Dumitru Erhan, Ian Goodfellow, and Rob Fergus. 2014. Intriguing Properties of Neural Networks.. In ICLR 2014 . arXiv:1312.6199 [cs] [102] Monika Taddicken. 2014. The ‘Privacy Paradox’ in the Social Web: The Impact of Privacy Concerns, Individual Characteristics, and the Perceived Social Relevance on Different Forms of Self-Disclosure*. Journal of Computer-Mediated Communication 19, 2 (Jan. 2014), 248–273. doi:10/f5pv2z [103] Hossein Talebi and Peyman Milanfar. 2018. NIMA: Neural Image Assessment. IEEE Transactions on Image Processing 27, 8 (Aug. 2018), 3998–4011. doi:10/gdpcsd [104] Alise Tifentale and Lev Manovich. 2015. Selfiecity: Exploring Photography and Self-Fashioning in Social Media. In Postdigital Aesthetics: Art, Computation and Design , David M. Berry and Michael Dieter (Eds.). Palgrave Macmillan UK, London, 109–122. doi:10.1057/9781137437204_9 [105] Ethan Tseng, Yuxuan Zhang, Lars Jebe, Xuaner Zhang, Zhihao Xia, Yifei Fan, Felix Heide, and Jiawen Chen. 2022. Neural Photo-Finishing. ACM Transactions on Graphics 41, 6 (Dec. 2022), 1–15. doi:10/gtn99d [106] John W Tukey. 1949. Comparing Individual Means in the Analysis of Variance. Biometrics. Journal of the International Biometric Society (1949), 99–114. [107] Heather Turner, Ioannis Kosmidis, and David Firth. 2025. PlackettLuce: Plackett-luce Models for Rankings . doi:10.32614/CRAN.package.PlackettLuce [108] Heather L. Turner, Jacob van Etten, David Firth, and Ioannis Kosmidis. 2020. Modelling Rankings in R: The PlackettLuce Package. Computational Statistics 35 (2020), 1027–1057. doi:10.1007/s00180-020-00959-3 26 Lagogiannis et al. 

[109] Rehmat Ullah, Hassan Hayat, Afsah Abid Siddiqui, Uzma Abid Siddiqui, Jebran Khan, Farman Ullah, Shoaib Hassan, Laiq Hasan, Waleed Albattah, Muhammad Islam, and Ghulam Mohammad Karami. 2022. A Real-Time Framework for Human Face Detection and Recognition in CCTV Images. 

Mathematical Problems in Engineering 2022, 1 (2022), 3276704. doi:10.1155/2022/3276704 [110] Megan A. Vendemia and David C. DeAndrea. 2021. The Effects of Engaging in Digital Photo Modifications and Receiving Favorable Comments on Women’s Selfies Shared on Social Media. Body Image 37 (June 2021), 74–83. doi:10/gsnqrr [111] Abhinau K. Venkataramanan, Chengyang Wu, Alan C. Bovik, Ioannis Katsavounidis, and Zafar Shahid. 2021. A Hitchhiker’s Guide to Structural Similarity. IEEE Access 9 (2021), 28872–28896. arXiv:2101.06354 [cs, eess] doi:10/gtq92w [112] Hoai Nam Vu, Mai Huong Nguyen, and Cuong Pham. 2022. Masked Face Recognition with Convolutional Neural Networks and Local Binary Patterns. Applied Intelligence 52, 5 (2022), 5497–5512. [113] Manish Reddy Vuyyuru, Andrzej Banburski, Nishka Pant, and Tomaso Poggio. 2020. Biologically Inspired Mechanisms for Adversarial Robustness.. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 33: Annual Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems 2020, NeurIPS 2020, December 6-12, 2020, Virtual. (NeurIPS 2020, Vol. 33) . Curran Associates, Inc., 2135–2146. [114] Emily Wenger, Shawn Shan, Haitao Zheng, and Ben Y. Zhao. 2023. Sok: Anti-facial Recognition Technology. In 2023 IEEE Symposium on Security and Privacy (SP) . IEEE, 864–881. doi:10/gsnqrg [115] Teke Wiggin. 2025. Weaponizing the Workplace: How Algorithmic Management Shaped Amazon’s Antiunion Campaign in Bessemer, Alabama. 

Socius 11 (Aug. 2025), 23780231251318389. doi:10.1177/23780231251318389 [116] Bailin Yang, Changrui Zhu, Frederick W.B. Li, Tianxiang Wei, Xiaohui Liang, and Qingxu Wang. 2023. IAACS: Image Aesthetic Assessment through Color Composition and Space Formation. Virtual Reality & Intelligent Hardware 5, 1 (2023), 42–56. doi:10/gst4h2 [117] Jonghwa Yim, Jisung Yoo, Won-joon Do, Beomsu Kim, and Jihwan Choe. 2020. Filter Style Transfer Between Photos. In Computer Vision – ECCV 2020 , Andrea Vedaldi, Horst Bischof, Thomas Brox, and Jan-Michael Frahm (Eds.). Vol. 12351. Springer International Publishing, Cham, 103–119. doi:10.1007/978-3-030-58539-6_7 [118] Bo Yu and Ian Lane. 2014. Multi-Task Deep Learning for Image Understanding. In 2014 6th International Conference of Soft Computing and Pattern Recognition (SoCPaR) . 37–42. doi:10/gtgm6v [119] Dan Zeng, Raymond Veldhuis, and Luuk Spreeuwers. 2021. A Survey of Face Recognition Techniques under Occlusion. IET Biometrics 10, 6 (2021), 581–606. doi:10.1049/bme2.12029 [120] Kaipeng Zhang, Zhanpeng Zhang, Zhifeng Li, and Yu Qiao. 2016. Joint Face Detection and Alignment Using Multitask Cascaded Convolutional Networks. IEEE Signal Processing Letters 23, 10 (Oct. 2016), 1499–1503. doi:10/gfhwcq [121] Richard Zhang, Phillip Isola, Alexei A. Efros, Eli Shechtman, and Oliver Wang. 2018. The Unreasonable Effectiveness of Deep Features as a Perceptual Metric. In 2018 IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR 2018) . IEEE, Salt Lake City, UT, 586–595. doi:10/gfz33w [122] Dorothy Zhao, Mikako Inaba, and Andrés Monroy-Hernández. 2022. Understanding Teenage Perceptions and Configurations of Privacy on Instagram. Proceedings of the ACM on Human-Computer Interaction 6, CSCW2, Article 550 (Nov. 2022), 28 pages. doi:10/gsnqsg [123] Yan Zhao, Xiuying Wang, Tongtong Che, Guoqing Bao, and Shuyu Li. 2023. Multi-Task Deep Learning for Medical Image Computing and Analysis: A Review. Computers in Biology and Medicine 153 (Feb. 2023), 106496. doi:10/gr2dvr [124] Diana Zulli. 2018. Capitalizing on the Look: Insights into the Glance, Attention Economy, and Instagram. Critical Studies in Media Communication 

35, 2 (March 2018), 137–150. doi:10.1080/15295036.2017.1394582 

1 I don’t feel comfortable with the changes made to the photograph. 2 I feel concerned with how the filter has affected my looks. 3 I feel the filtered photo’s changes are immediately noticeable. 4 My family or friends would ask about the filtered photo if I posted it on social media. 5 The filter makes me look less human. 6 The changes made by the filter defeat the purpose of sharing the image. 7 I wouldn’t share the image publicly after the filter was applied. 8 I would rarely use this filter for photos shared to social media. 

Table 3. The SAIA-8 questionnaire items. Responses are on a 5-point Likert scale from Strongly Disagree (1) to Strongly Agree (5). AuraMask 27 Output at Epoch 100 300 500 

TopIQ L𝐹 𝐸𝐴𝑇 TopIQ L𝐹 𝐸𝐴𝑇 TopIQ L𝐹 𝐸𝐴𝑇 

0.151 −0.224 0.123 −0.246 0.123 −0.258 

> Fig. 11. ATN trained only using TopIQ as perceptual loss.

ArcFace Facenet VGGFace 

ST ET ST ET ST ET 

Dogpatch-Dogpatch 0.93 0.94 0.83 0.67 0.77 0.85 

Nashville-Nashville 0.85 0.94 0.82 0.58 0.81 0.80 

Sutro-Sutro 0.87 0.97 0.83 0.77 0.81 0.72 

Dogpatch-Moon 0.88 0.90 0.75 0.50 0.77 0.84 

Dogpatch-Nashville 0.87 0.93 0.83 0.57 0.77 0.78 

Dogpatch-Sutro 0.89 0.06 0.83 0.10 0.77 0.11 

Moon-Nashville 0.84 0.88 0.75 0.44 0.77 0.79 

Moon-Sutro 0.85 0.02 0.73 0.07 0.77 0.09 

Sutro-Nashville 0.85 0.09 0.81 0.12 0.78 0.16 

> Table 4. Paired Obfuscation recall performance with the face verification task using LFW pairs dataset across ST and ET. Table 5. Recall rate across defenses and evaluations.

ArcFace VGGFace Facenet 

FDF LFW FDF LFW FDF LFW Baseline 1.000 0.905 1.000 0.798 1.000 0.873 

LowKey 0.974 0.122 0.970 0.263 0.470 0.026 

Fawkes 

L 0.993 0.859 1.000 0.721 0.888 0.594 

M 0.921 0.671 0.998 0.539 0.643 0.180 

H 0.864 0.565 0.997 0.501 0.519 0.090 

ST ET ST ET ST ET ST ET ST ET ST ET 

1977 0.007 0.025 0.011 0.086 1.000 0.075 0.773 0.032 0.960 0.449 0.768 0.372 

Aden 0.007 0.026 0.014 0.078 1.000 0.092 0.813 0.024 0.996 0.127 0.834 0.103 

Amaro 0.020 0.049 0.025 0.136 1.000 0.110 0.793 0.030 0.992 0.357 0.829 0.251 28 Lagogiannis et al. 

Table 5 continued from previous page ArcFace VGGFace Facenet 

FDF LFW FDF LFW FDF LFW 

ST ET ST ET ST ET ST ET ST ET ST ET 

Brannan 0.004 0.017 0.020 0.167 1.000 0.119 0.790 0.042 0.962 0.391 0.773 0.207 

Ginza 0.055 0.034 0.015 0.115 1.000 0.171 0.797 0.040 0.975 0.208 0.853 0.298 

Lofi 0.019 0.066 0.025 0.131 1.000 0.133 0.767 0.078 0.994 0.311 0.837 0.432 

Ludwig 0.012 0.072 0.019 0.093 0.999 0.149 0.792 0.059 0.974 0.363 0.847 0.441 

Mayfair 0.043 0.069 0.021 0.145 1.000 0.219 0.755 0.052 0.982 0.220 0.775 0.276 

Nashville 0.006 0.040 0.015 0.130 0.998 0.195 0.791 0.028 0.971 0.189 0.827 0.204 

Ashby 0.006 0.087 0.016 0.063 0.996 0.200 0.790 0.055 0.956 0.339 0.839 0.406 

Brooklyn 0.017 0.102 0.018 0.115 1.000 0.186 0.794 0.043 0.763 0.327 0.846 0.253 

Charmes 0.024 0.073 0.011 0.102 1.000 0.134 0.786 0.049 0.968 0.295 0.840 0.287 

Clarendon 0.005 0.043 0.015 0.208 1.000 0.120 0.785 0.068 0.989 0.373 0.822 0.270 

Crema 0.019 0.059 0.015 0.147 0.995 0.137 0.793 0.041 0.914 0.260 0.833 0.142 

Dogpatch 0.004 0.106 0.014 0.200 1.000 0.154 0.776 0.087 0.988 0.331 0.000 0.334 

Earlybird 0.010 0.039 0.012 0.181 1.000 0.093 0.686 0.065 0.995 0.224 0.623 0.200 

Gingham 0.013 0.014 0.017 0.131 1.000 0.126 0.782 0.046 0.890 0.128 0.746 0.266 

Hefe 0.011 0.070 0.019 0.139 1.000 0.225 0.755 0.047 0.987 0.613 0.822 0.253 

Helena 0.007 0.044 0.014 0.152 1.000 0.156 0.803 0.049 0.960 0.498 0.834 0.239 

Hudson 0.006 0.063 0.017 0.127 1.000 0.147 0.797 0.019 0.993 0.231 0.832 0.078 

Inkwell 0.061 0.084 0.016 0.053 0.994 0.236 0.780 0.052 0.934 0.456 0.655 0.133 

Juno 0.010 0.043 0.015 0.113 1.000 0.142 0.785 0.090 0.978 0.476 0.843 0.544 

Kelvin 0.005 0.025 0.016 0.070 1.000 0.118 0.781 0.058 0.997 0.187 0.803 0.509 

Lark 0.065 0.062 0.018 0.065 1.000 0.156 0.795 0.050 0.960 0.408 0.845 0.130 

Maven 0.008 0.011 0.014 0.095 0.996 0.077 0.809 0.032 0.874 0.096 0.835 0.115 

Moon 0.015 0.052 0.015 0.062 1.000 0.107 0.784 0.036 0.965 0.244 0.726 0.163 

Perpetua 0.011 0.020 0.015 0.090 1.000 0.124 0.807 0.035 0.997 0.167 0.835 0.153 

Poprocket 0.008 0.009 0.015 0.081 1.000 0.053 0.755 0.045 0.774 0.272 0.605 0.229 

Reyes 0.007 0.032 0.016 0.105 1.000 0.081 0.797 0.015 0.991 0.201 0.825 0.093 

Rise 0.002 0.030 0.006 0.089 1.000 0.085 0.798 0.031 0.992 0.357 0.825 0.231 

Sierra 0.011 0.101 0.015 0.160 1.000 0.202 0.785 0.087 0.964 0.326 0.775 0.210 

Skyline 0.019 0.139 0.013 0.230 0.999 0.243 0.784 0.088 0.974 0.396 0.825 0.390 

Slumber 0.001 0.027 0.005 0.097 1.000 0.104 0.800 0.020 0.990 0.128 0.841 0.071 

Stinson 0.053 0.019 0.018 0.063 1.000 0.068 0.793 0.015 0.990 0.125 0.790 0.082 

Sutro 0.006 0.024 0.015 0.117 1.000 0.128 0.785 0.035 0.969 0.171 0.832 0.138 

Toaster 0.027 0.070 0.019 0.136 1.000 0.188 0.782 0.085 0.901 0.288 0.725 0.190 

Valencia 0.002 0.043 0.010 0.124 1.000 0.147 0.808 0.022 0.994 0.175 0.837 0.115 

Walden 0.066 0.025 0.021 0.097 1.000 0.081 0.787 0.034 0.924 0.244 0.794 0.329 AuraMask 29 

Table 5 continued from previous page ArcFace VGGFace Facenet 

FDF LFW FDF LFW FDF LFW 

ST ET ST ET ST ET ST ET ST ET ST ET 

Willow 0.004 0.029 0.013 0.047 1.000 0.070 0.784 0.037 0.915 0.073 0.712 0.066 

XPro2 0.050 0.053 0.023 0.179 0.999 0.156 0.762 0.029 0.947 0.185 0.784 0.088