Title: GRD-Net: Generative-Reconstructive-Discriminative Anomaly Detection with Region of Interest Attention Module

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2603.07566v1

Published Time: Tue, 10 Mar 2026 01:17:00 GMT

Number of Pages: 31

Markdown Content:
# GRD-Net: Generative-Reconstructive-Discriminative Anomaly Detection with Region of Interest Attention Module 

## Niccol` o Ferrari ∗†‡ Michele Fraccaroli ∗ Evelina Lamma ∗

## 06/12/2022 

# 1 Abstract 

Anomaly detection is nowadays increasingly used in industrial applications and processes. One of the main fields of the appliance is the visual inspection for sur-face anomaly detection, which aims to spot regions that deviate from regularity and consequently identify abnormal products. Defect localization is a key task, that usually is achieved using a basic comparison between generated image and the original one, implementing some blob-analysis or image-editing algorithms, in the post-processing step, which is very biased towards the source dataset, and they are unable to generalize. Furthermore, in industrial applications, the totality of the image is not always interesting but could be one or some regions of interest (ROIs), where only in those areas there are relevant anomalies to be spotted. For these reasons, we propose a new architecture composed by two blocks. The first block is a Generative Adversarial Network (GAN), based on a residual autoencoder (ResAE), to perform reconstruction and denoising pro-cesses, while the second block produces image segmentation, spotting defects. This method learns from a dataset composed of good products and generated synthetic defects. The discriminative network is trained using a ROI for each image contained in the training dataset. The network will learn in which area anomalies are relevant. This approach guarantees the reduction of using pre-processing algorithms, formerly developed with blob-analysis and image-editing procedures. To test our model we used challenging MVTec anomaly detection datasets and an industrial large dataset of pharmaceutical BFS strips of vials. This set constitutes a more realistic use case of the aforementioned network. 

> ∗Department of Engineering, University of Ferrara, Via Saragat 1, 44122 Ferrara, Italy
> †Bonfiglioli Engineering, Via Amerigo Vespucci 20, 44124 Ferrara, Italy
> ‡niccolo.ferrari@unife.it, nferrari@bonfiglioliengineering.com

1

> arXiv:2603.07566v1 [cs.CV] 8 Mar 2026

# 2 Keywords 

Anomaly Detection, Attention Module, Generative Adversarial Network, Defect Localization, Region of Interest 

# 3 Acknowledgments 

The authors would like to thank Bonfiglioli Engineering for providing a real-case dataset to test the software developed in this work. The first author is supported by a industrial PhD funded by Bonfiglioli Engineering, Ferrara, Italy. The other author is supported by a PhD scholarship funded by the Emilia Romagna region, Italy, under POR FSE 2014–2020 program. 

# 4 Nomenclature 

AE AutoEncoder VAE Variational AutoEncoder CNN Convolutional Neural Network RNN Recurrent Neural Network LSTM Long Short Time Memory GAN Generative Adversarial Network Generator Generative subnet of the GAN Discriminator Adversarial subnet of the GAN Discriminative net U-Net subsequent to the GAN used for segmentation CRAE fully-Convolutional Residual AutoEncoder DRAE Dense-bottleneck Residual AutoEncoder AUROC Area Under the Receiver Operating Characteristic ROI Region Of Interest SSIM Structural Similarity Index Measure 

# 5 Introduction 

Semi-supervised computer vision is a task increasingly used in the industrial sector. The reasons are to be found in its flexibility and in its capability to gen-eralize when a new anomaly is seen. Moreover, despite the good performance of supervised approaches in computer vision fields, but requiring a large number of examples during the training phase, the previously mentioned approach requires only a significant number of nominal examples to define their distribution. Re-garding defects, on the other hand, it requires just a little set of anomalies, used for testing purposes and in some cases to define an anomaly threshold. In real cases, on production lines, the availability of regular products is the vast majority compared to anomalies. For this reason, the training dataset would be extremely unbalanced in favor of nominal examples. This makes it dif-ficult performing a good training supervised model. Moreover is often required 2to locate the defect within the image, because usually, the defective portion cov-ers a small area of the whole surface. To give an example, on pharmaceutical vials defect are frequently little scratches, very small black spots or some alien particles deposited on the surface of products, which are usually between 100 and 1000 μm . This target could be more easily reached with a semi-supervised anomaly detection architecture, and more specifically with a reconstruction-based approach, in which the network gives you a reconstruction of the image without the anomalous area. Reconstructive methods include Autoencoder (AE) [1, 2], Variational Au-toencoder (VAE) [3, 4] and Generative Adversarial Network (GAN) [5]. They have been thoroughly investigated since they make it possible to learn a robust reconstruction subspace using only images without anomalies. Thanks to the incapability to rebuild anomalous regions, which was not contained within nom-inal images during training, the network fails to reproduce out-of-distribution area. For this reason, it’s possible to detect discrepancies between the two im-ages by thresholding, for example, the absolute value of the difference between them. This is the most immediate and simple method for performing final clas-sification, but it is a non-parametric approach for anomaly localization, and in some cases, discrimination could be erroneous in some noisy cases, because the sum of all the small differences could exceed the threshold. In other cases could be inaccurate, due to the lack of comprehension of differences between the two images, which is left to a simple threshold. In addition to this, our Generative-Reconstructive-Discriminative Anomaly Detection with Region of Interest Attention Module network ( GRD-Net ) aims to minimize the development of pre-processing algorithms that are used to lo-cate the portion of the image in which searching for anomalies. In classical 

reconstruction-based methods, the generation of anomaly map, as mentioned above, is left to a threshold-based classifier, so is not possible to turn attention to one or more specific ROIs. Embedding similarity-based approach constitutes another big family of architectures, offering encouraging results. However, due to the lack of comprehensibility of the result and learning process, it becomes more difficult to impose an ROI, which draws attention to defects. For all the aforementioned reasons, a second network, chained to the first generative part, is required to achieve the intended results. This work is heav-ily inspired by the discriminatively trained reconstruction anomaly embedding model (DRÆM) [6]. DRÆM works by learning a joint representation of an anomalous image and its anomaly-free reconstruction and, simultaneously learn-ing a decision boundary between anomalous and positive examples. This method enables direct anomaly localization avoiding the implementation of some post-processing techniques. DRÆM is based on a first reconstructive network (an autoencoder) and a 

discriminative network . The first network is trained to identify and reconstruct anomalies, maintaining the non-anomalous regions of the input image. The second network combines original and reconstructed appearance to learn joint-3anomaly inclusion reconstruction, to produce accurate anomaly segmentation maps [6]. In the context of this work, the autoencoder that defines the reconstructive network is replaced with GANomaly [7]. GANomaly is a Generative Adversarial Network (GAN) [5] architecture that simultaneously learns how to create a high-dimensional image space and infer a latent space. The model can map the input image to a lower dimension vector using encoder-decoder-encoder sub-networks, which are then used to reconstruct the generated output image. This generated image is mapped to its latent representation by the additional encoder network. Learning the data distribution for the normal samples is aided by minimizing the distance between these images and the latent vectors during training. The generative part of the GAN is constituted by a fully-convolutional residual autoencoder [8], that, as mentioned by Wickramasinghe et al. , residual blocks help to prevent the gradient vanishing on deep convolutional networks, and thus avoiding the deterioration of learned embedded-representations. In this work, summarizing: 1. the generalization capability of the GANomaly architecture [7] with the denoising ability derived from the DRÆM architecture [6] are merged in the reconstructive part of the model 2. the reconstructive autoencoder is residual and fully convolutional [8], im-proving the stability of the learning process 3. an attention module that uses a ROI is added for each example during the training phase, to learn the area where to focus the segmentation of the abnormal area, in the discriminative part of the model The first network rebuilds the original image in a better and more precise way with a more performing and stable training phase, regarding the two reference models GANomaly and DRÆM. This is thanks to the residual autoencoder with the GAN structure and the mask superimposed, obtained by adding Perlin noise to the input. This technique challenges the network not only to rebuild the input image as it is, but also to regenerate the hidden part by the noise in a coherent way. The second block identifies the area where the defect is located, which is a specification required in most industrial applications, with an attention module ROI-based. Defining a ROI for each training example lets the network learn the important area of the product where to look for defects, using the original and the reconstructed image by the first block. In this way, the second net generalizes and spots the ROI in the new input images during production, excluding the research of defects outside. This is a very important result because often we need to spot defects within a region of interest (ROI), excluding the more chaotic and false-reject-prone area outside. The rest of the paper is organized as follows: Section 6 describes related works. Section 7 present the background knowledge necessary for the correct 4understanding of this work (Sections 7.1 and 7.2) and our contribution (7.3). Section 8 illustrates the experiments and the results obtained on the various datasets. Finally, in Section 9 we present conclusions and future work. 

# 6 Related Work 

Many surface anomaly detection techniques exploit the reconstruction-based ap-proach. This approach is based on image reconstruction and identify anomalies working on image reconstruction error [7, 9, 10]. Typically, neural networks like Autoeconders (AEs) [10, 11], Variational Autoencoders (VAEs) [12] and Generative Adversarial Networks (GANs) [7, 13, 14, 15] are used for image re-construction as described in [10]. The finding of an anomaly is generally based on the quality of image reconstruction. Reconstruction-based methods can use the structural similarity [10] or the pixel-wise reconstruction error [16] as the anomaly score to localize anomalies. A visual attention map created from the latent space can also be used as the anomaly map [12]. Another reconstruction-based model that implement a segmentation structure based on transformer is RDAD [17]. The reconstruction-based approach are easily interpretable but their performance is constrained by the fact that AE can occasionally produce good reconstruction outcomes for anomalous images as well [18]. A good com-parison and analysis of the different techniques was described by Xuan Xia et. al. [15], explaining the benefits of a semi-supervised machine learning archi-tecture for reconstruction-based method, but also comparing some embedding similarity-based methods. Another important family of methods in the filed of anomaly detection is, precisely, the embedding similarity-based approach. These techniques extract useful vectors describing an entire image for anomaly detection [19, 20] or an image patch for anomaly localization [21] using deep neural networks. However, in several works based on embedding similarity-based methods, it offers encour-aging results but frequently lacks interpretability. It is impossible to identify the specific aspect of an anomalous image that contributed to its anomaly score. The anomaly score is in this case the distance between the embedding vectors of a test image and the reference vectors representing normality from the training dataset. The normal reference can be defined as the center of a sphere that contains embedding from normal images or the entire set of normal embedding as in the case of SPADE [22]. Another interesting approach that work with patch embedding is PaDiM [23]. Normal class in PaDiM is described through a set of Gaussian distributions that utilizes the pre-trained Convolutional Neural Network (CNN) to models correlations between semantic levels. Heavily related to SPADE and PaDiM, there is PatchCore [24] that uses a memory bank with neighbourhood-aware patch-level features in order to increase performance. Ad-ditionally, corset sub-sampling of the memory bank ensures low inference cost at higher performance. A further sub-category of methods, however based on embedding similarity-based approach, is the one based on generative models called normalizing flows (NFLOW) [25]. The main advantage of NFLOW mod-5els is ability to estimate the exact likelihoods for out-of-distribution examples compared to other generative models [26, 27, 28]. Notable works in the NFLOW category can be the system developed by Rudolph et. al. called DifferNet [29], the work of Gudovskiy et. al. called CFLOW-AD [30] and the more recent Jae-hyeok Bae et. al. work called PNI [31], which takes into account the position and neighborhood information on the distribution of normal features. 

Knowledge distillation techniques are also widely used in anomaly detection tasks, especially when we’re dealing with large images, as in the work of Paul Bergmann et. al. [32]. This matter is examined in the work also written by Paul Bergmann et. al. Beyond Dents and Scratches [33], in which anoma-lies are divided into logical and structural. Noteworthy is also the knowledge distillation-based work of Kilian Batzner et. al. EfficientAD [34] where pro-cessing time plays a central role in the problem definition, because more and more often lots of real-time applications use unsupervised machine learning al-gorithms for anomaly detection tasks. 

Reconstruction-based anomaly detection approaches are widely used in dif-ferent areas with other types of data, like time series data. In these cases con-ventional threshold-based anomaly detection methods are inadequate, as men-tioned by Dan Li et. al. [35]. To handle this type of data, an LSTM-RNN model must be introduced into the GAN or VAE-GAN architecture [36, 37] with an encoder-decoder-encoder shape. Such data may be derived from indus-trial processes [38], where it is often difficult to obtain balanced data between regular and abnormal data. Also, it can be obtained by smart grids [39, 40], where it is mandatory to monitor data for security tasks but equally difficult to handle such big data without artificial intelligence algorithms; finally, data could consist of video streams [41]. A special mention should be made to the work of Zavrtanik et. al. [6] as this work is largely based and inspired by DRÆM. This work exploits a reconstruction and a discriminative network to segment artificial noise. The output of DRÆM is an anomaly detection mask and the anomaly score. The anomaly mask can be used to estimate the image-level anomaly score. The maximum value of the smoothed anomaly score map is used to calculate the final score. 

# 7 Methods 

To explain our approach, we firstly introduces DRÆM and GANomaly as they are the knowledge base necessary for understanding the rest of the paper. In this section, summarizing: 1. DRÆM architecture [6], which is the starting point of our improvements 2. GANomaly architecture [7], which extends with GAN’s benefits the DRÆM architecture, with special attention to GAN structure and training loop 6(a) Perlin Noise (b) Perlin Noise with random RGB pixels (c) Dataset’s image with Perlin noise 

Figure 1: Simulated anomaly generation process. In (a) there is an example of Perlin noise. (b) represent the merging of the anomaly map and a random RGB pixels. (c) represent and example of a image with generated fake anomalies. 3. The Generative-Reconstructive-Discriminative Network (GRD-Net) archi-tecture, with the attention module based on ROIs. 

## 7.1 DRÆM 

As mentioned before, DRÆM is an anomaly detection framework based on two different sub-networks. The first subnetwork (called reconstructive sub-network), is trained to recognize anomalies and reconstruct them while keeping the portions of the input image that are not anomalous. The second network learns joint-anomaly inclusion reconstruction to create accurate anomaly seg-mentation maps by fusing the original and reconstructed appearance. Instead of generating simulations that accurately reflect the actual appear-ance of the anomaly in the target domain, DRÆM instead creates just-out-of-distribution appearances that allow learning the proper distance function to identify the anomaly by its departure from normality. This paradigm is used in the proposed anomaly simulator. The images with artificial anomalies are generated through Perlin noise generator [42] to generate a variety of anomaly shapes (see Figure 1 (a)). The generated image, is then binarized by a thresh-old into an anomaly map using uniformly random samples. Then, merging the anomaly map with a random RGB pixels, we obtain the final noise (see Figure 1 (b)) to be added to the images of the dataset as can be seen in Figure 1 (c). Thus, this process creates training sample triplets with the original image that is free of anomalies, the augmented image that contains simulated anomalies, and the pixel-perfect anomaly mask. The reconstructive sub-network of DRÆM perform an image denoising task. It is trained to reconstruct the original image from the artificial corrupted ver-sion produced by the process described above. The discriminative sub-network 7is a U-Net-like neural network that take in input the channel-wise concatena-tion of the reconstructive sub-net output and the original image. This second sub-network learns to segment the Perlin noise applied to the original image instead to used a similarity functions such as SSIM [43]. The output of the discriminative sub-network is an anomaly detection mask. This mask can be interpreted for the image-level anomaly score estimation. The anomaly mask is smoothed by a convolutional filter. The final anomaly score is computed by taking the maximum value of the smoothed anomaly score map. 

## 7.2 GANomaly 

7.2.1 Adversarial Autoencoders 

An Autoencoder (AE) [44] is a neural network that has been trained to attempt to replicate its input to its output. The two components of this network are an encoder (E) that maps the input into latent space h and a decoder (D) that reconstructs the input from the latent space. The ability to constrain h to be smaller than x and the input copying task are where AE’s potential lies (in this case, we talk about undercomplete AE). The network is forced to recognise the most crucial aspects of the input data when learning an undercomplete repre-sentation. This procedure can be carried out by minimising the the network’s penalty function when is far from x. To outperform the standard AEs, we can think to train an AE in an adversarial environment [45]. Training AEs with ad-versarial setting improves reconstruction while also giving the user more control over latent space [46, 47]. 

7.2.2 Generative Adversarial Networks 

GANs are an unsupervised machine learning approach developed for the task of generate synthetic data [5]. Specifically, the first purpose of the GANs was to generate realistic synthetic images. The concept is that during training, two networks - the discriminator and the generator - compete with one another so that the former attempts to generate an image while the latter determines whether it is real or fake. The generator, that is similar to a decoder, learns the distribution of input data from a latent space. 

7.2.3 GANomaly Architecture & Training 

The GANomaly architecture contains two encoders, a decoder, forming an encoder-decoder-encoder structure and discriminator networks [7]. The first encoder-decoder sub-network in an AE that work as the generator part of the model. The generator uses an AE network to reconstruct the input image x after learning how to represent the input data. The second encoder of the encoder-decoder-encoder structure is a network that compress the reconstructed image ˆx. This encoder has the same architecture on the previous encoder but with dif-ferent parametrization. This encoder explicitly learns to minimize the distance 8with its parametrization. This minimization is used during the test to perform anomaly detection. The discriminator network aims to classify the input x and the output ˆ x as real or fake. GANomaly is trained by minimizing a loss consisting of three components: the adversarial, contextual and encoder loss. Adversarial loss ( Ladv ) calculated for the discriminator and it is used to reduce the instability of GAN training. Contextual loss ( Lcon ) is used to add the contextual information to the final loss. This sub-loss calculates the L1 distance between x and ˆ x, added to Lssim =1 − SSIM score loss also calculated between x and ˆ x. So final Lcon becomes: 

Lcon = ωaL1(x, ˆx) + ωbLssim (x, ˆx). (1) Finally, the Encoder loss ( Lenc ) is used to minimize the distance between bot-tleneck features of the input and the encoded features of the generated image. Then, the final loss is describe as: 

Lgan = ω1Ladv + ω2Lcon + ω3Lenc . (2) where the weighting parameters ( ω1, ω2, and ω3) are used to modify the effect of individual losses on the overall objective function. Empirically, it has been found that the best values of the parameters are: 

ωa = 1 , ω b = 1 , ω 1 = 1 , ω 2 = 50 , ω 3 = 1 . (3) These results were obtained starting from the relative reference papers of GANomaly [7], where ω1 = 1, ω2 = 40 and ω3 = 1 and DRÆM where ωa = 1, 

ωb = 1. Using a branch and bound approach with a step of ±5 on one ω∗ at a time, keeping constant the value of the others. We thus noticed that the weight related to Lcon , that is ω2, could be increased to 50 with better result in terms of training time, without losing the contribute of the other components of the main loss. 

## 7.3 Generative-Reconstructive-Discriminative Network with Attention Module 

This work is heavily inspired by DRÆM [6]. This is reflected in the general architecture of the proposed framework. As you can see in Figure 2, the archi-tecture is quite similar to the vanilla DRÆM but with the difference that instead of the AE which acted as Reconstructive network, there is now an implemen-tation of GANomaly. All networks engaged in the reconstructive sub-network are residual to avoid degradation problems during the training. Then, to train the GANomaly engaged in GRD-Net, the loss described in Equation 2 is used. To train the discriminative network, Focal Loss (FL) [48, 6] is used. FL can be defined by the equation: 

FL (p) = −(1 − p)γ log( p). (4) 9Real/ 

> Fake
> Concat.

η 

> Anomaly Score
> Reconstructive network | GANomaly
> Discriminative network
> Encoder Encoder Decoder
> Discriminator
> Perlin Noise generator
> Anomaly map

Figure 2: The architecture of DRÆM GAN. The architecture is quite similar to vanilla DRÆM, but we can see the implementation of GANomaly instead of the AE which acted as the Reconstructive network. Basically, FL adds the factor −(1 −p)γ to the standard cross entropy. Setting 

γ > 0 reduces the relative loss for the well classified images, putting more focus on the misclassified examples [48]. This loss applied on this sub-network, increase robustness towards accurate segmentation of hard examples. A further improvement was applied to the discriminatory network. In order to ensure that only the defects present on the surface of the inspected products are considered. To do this, in addition to the images of the dataset, the network is also given a segmentation mask that highlights the area of interest (AOI) of the product. This mask is multiplied by the anomaly detection mask to obtain an intersection mask . Then, FL is calculated on this intersection. The overall loss of GRD-Net became: 

I = Adiscr × ROI input . (5) Where I is the intersection mask, that is a tensor obtained by the intersec-tion (multiplication) of the input mask tensor ROI input , that highlight a ROI (Region Of Interest) in which the network has to segment the anomaly area, and the output mask tensor Adiscr of the discriminative network, that segment the original image 

Ltot = Lgan + FL (I, Minput ). (6) So the total loss function Ltot is the sum of the GAN Loss Lgan and the Focal Loss calculated on the intersection area FL (I)10 Input Image 

(X) 

Input tuple: original image, 

noise mask and image with 

noise 

(X, M, X n)

PERLIN NOISE 

(M, X n) = P(X) 

GENERATOR 

X̂  = G(X n)

|| X̂  - X||  → 0 

DISCRIMINATOR 

E = D(X)  ∈ [0,1] 

Ê = D( X̂ ) ∈ [0,1] 

Input tuple: image with noise, 

rebuild image, noise mask 

(X̂ , X n, M) 

DISCRIMINATIVE NET 

(η,  M̂ ) = Δ( X̂ , X n)

|| M̂  - (M × ROI)|| 2 → 0 Figure 3: Train step flowchart: input image X is transformed in Xn, that is the image with the Perlin noise superimposed. M is the mask image of the noise areas. 11 Input Image 

(X) 

GENERATOR 

X̂  = G(X n)

|| X̂  - X||  → 0 

Input tuple: input image, 

rebuild image 

(X̂ , X n)

DISCRIMINATIVE NET 

(η,  M̂ ) = Δ( X̂ , X) 

Output tuple: 

(X̂ , η,  M̂ )Figure 4: Inference step flowchart. 12 Finally, the overall training and inference sequences are schematized respec-tively in Figures 3 and 4. 

# 8 Experiments 

Several experiments were performed to test the performance of GRD-Net. First of all the performances of the GAN with residual convolutional autoencoder have been compared and evaluated with DRÆM and GANomaly, which rep-resent state-of-the-art reconstruction-based anomaly detection and localization technologies. A schema of one stage composed of two residual blocks is shown in Figure 5. Experiments were conducted over 200 training epochs using vanilla DRÆM autoencoder and our GAN with residual AE. Our network takes inspiration from the ResNet V2 architecture used for the classification task [49]. In this section, summarizing: 1. The residual block applied to our architecture 2. The two phases of the training loop for the generative part and the dis-criminative part 3. The benefits of residual network applied to autoencoder of generative part of the GAN. 4. Experiments on the Generative-Reconstructive-Discriminative Network (GRD-Net) architecture, with the attention module based on ROIs. 5. A real-case experiments based on pharmaceutical BFS vials, with atten-tion on the body of the aforementioned vials. The first part of the experiments was conducted using three challenging datasets from MVTec’s sets: hazelnut, metal nut and pill datasets. In the second part, the network was tested on hazelnut, zip and a proprietary pharmaceutical set of BFS strips of vials, from a real study and use case that took place in Bonfiglioli Engineering, for a quality control vision inspection machine. For those datasets, a second ROI dataset was prepared for each training nominal image. 

## 8.1 GAN with Residual AE 

As mentioned above, the first experiment aims to challenge the vanilla version of DRÆM architecture. The training lasted 200 epochs, instead of the 700 used for testing DRÆM on the original paper, this to provide a more realistic case, which can be implemented on a production line in a real industrial field. During 13 Conv 2D 

> LeakyReLU
> Conv 2D
> LeakyReLU
> Conv 2D
> LeakyReLU
> Conv 2D
> LeakyReLU
> Conv 2D
> LeakyReLU

Figure 5: Two consecutive residual blocks of one stage of the encoder network. The introduction of a residual architecture in the encoder-decoder-encoder GAN [49] revealed to be more stable during training phase, by giving better results with equal epochs. this step were evaluated anomaly detection per image and defect localization within the image. Learning rate is set to 10 −4 and we used a policy based on “reduction on plateau ” heuristic with a patience of 3 epochs and a reduction factor α = 0 .1. When a plateau of 3 epochs is reached at epoch k it decreases using the formula: 

LR k = LR k−1 · e−α. (7) Where LR k is the learning rate at the k-th epoch. For the evaluation, we used the AUROC, widely used in architecture com-parisons, at image-level and at pixel-level, as semi-supervised anomaly detection and localization score. Data augmentation is performed on training examples, using a random ro-tation in the range of [ − π 

> 2

, + π 

> 2

] radians, in order to reduce overfitting during training over lots of epochs, because of the small number of anomaly-free images provided in MVTec datasets.           

> AUROC per image (pixel) at 10 epochs DRÆM GRD-Net 73.1 96.7 hazelnut (55.7) (91.0) 58.3 96.4 metal nut (49.0) (69.3) 74.2 77.5 pill (66.0) (90.5)

Table 1: AUROC score after 10 epochs of training per image and (pixel). 

14 AUROC per image (pixel) at 35 epochs DRÆM GRD-NET 85.3 99.5 hazelnut (82.4) (95.5) 61.8 99.3 metal nut (49.0) (69.3) 75.7 89.8 pill (86.5) (95.5) 

Table 2: AUROC score after 35 epochs of training per image and (pixel). AUROC per image (pixel) at 100 epochs DRÆM GRD-Net 98.8 100.0 hazelnut (94.8) (97.3) 99.7 99.8 metal nut (86.7) (70.4) 93.8 98.2 pill (94.8) (95.5) 

Table 3: AUROC score after 100 epochs of training per image and (pixel). 

For the sake of completeness, we also tested and compared GRD-Net with a vanilla convolutional autoencoder (that is without residual block), and the GRD-Net with fully-convolutional residual autoencoder. The experiment was performed using our huge pharmaceutical dataset on 500 epochs, using only the generative part, comparing the losses. This since the second part depends strictly on the performance of the first. The experimental results are very encouraging in support of the intuition that the residual network, even in the case of an autoencoder applied to a GAN, is more effective in generating the final data. This can be visually appreciated in the Figure 6. We also provided a com-parison between losses used for the generator in Table 5. 

Anomaly Detection For what concerns surface anomaly detection, our pro-posed architecture enhance somewhat not only the final score of the two ref-erence models but improves also the learning curve making it smoother and steeper toward convergence, especially during the first transitional period. In addition to this, also the difference between training and validation curves is far less with our model. The smoothing of the learning curve can be explained by the GAN model that, with the discriminator network, improve the stability of the training process. The steepest incline and a lower presence of the over-fitting phenomenon (that can be observed with the higher difference between validation and training curves), can be attributed to both the GAN model and residual net. This is due to the improvement given by the adversarial part of the GAN and by the reduction of the gradient vanishing that could affect deep convolutional networks. 15 (a) Training adversarial loss (magenta for vanilla and cyan for residual) 

(b) Training contextual loss (magenta for vanilla and cyan for residual) 

(c) Training encoder loss (magenta for vanilla and cyan for residual) 

(d) Training SSIM loss (magenta for vanilla and cyan for residual) 

(e) Validation adversarial loss (magenta for vanilla and cyan for residual) 

(f) Validation contextual loss (magenta for vanilla and cyan for residual) 

(g) Validation encoder loss (magenta for vanilla and cyan for residual) 

(h) Validation SSIM loss (magenta for vanilla and cyan for residual) 

Figure 6: Visual representation of how the network with vanilla autoencoder (magenta) is not only less effective, but also noisier in some losses, such as adversarial loss, compared to the residual architecture (cyan). 16 AUROC per image (pixel) GANomaly DRÆM PaDiM PatchCore GRD-Net 78.5 100.0 - 100.0 100.0 hazelnut (-) (95.0) 97.7 98.6 (97.4) 70.0 98.7 - 99.7 100.0 metal nut (-) (86.7) 96.7 98.4 (96.2) 74.3 97.9 - 97.0 98.5 pill (-) (94.8) 94.7 97.1 (95.8) 75.7 91.8 - 99.3 99.5 cable (-) (94.7) 96.7 98.2 (98.1) 

Table 4: Final comparative table with AUROC score between GANomaly (200 epochs), DRÆM (200 epochs), PaDiM (ResNet18 pre-train), PatchCore (ResNet50 pre-train) and GRD-Net (200 epochs). The results of GANomaly and DRÆM. are obtained by us adjusting the number of training epochs to the number of training epochs used to train GRD-Net, for this reason the final result may vary a little from the reference paper. Loss value for training (validation) phase Epoch 250 vanilla Epoch 250 residual Epoch 500 vanilla Epoch 500 residual 2.8811 × 10 −3 3.2498 × 10 −4 7.4750 × 10 −4 1.3797 × 10 −4

Adversarial Loss (5 .1180 × 10 −2) (3 .8928 × 10 −3) (1 .3720 × 10 −3) (4 .5011 × 10 −4)0.03502 0.01853 0.02912 0.01460 Contextual loss (0.04136) (0.02782) (0.03747) (0.02488) 1.7221 × 10 −4 6.8905 × 10 −5 1.1745 × 10 −4 4.6982 × 10 −5

Encoder Loss (2 .1078 × 10 −4) (1 .2333 × 10 −4) (1 .6965 × 10 −4) (1 .4363 × 10 −4)0.02665 0.01304 0.02200 0.01014 SSIM Loss (0.03115) (0.02010) (0.02830) (0.01872) 

Table 5: Comparison between vanilla and residual architecture used for gener-ative part of the GAN architecture in the GRD-Net. 

Anomaly Localization As for anomaly detection, also anomaly localization has been compared with DRÆM after 200 epochs of training. GANomaly was not included in this comparison because does not exist, in the official paper, a method capable of locating defective regions. Table 1, 2, 3 and Table 4 show the AUROC result comparison between DRÆM and our approach, as mentioned above in four different stages of the training phase: after 10, 50, 100 and 200 epochs. The results are very encouraging because they improve those of the vanilla network, in fact, a better quality of the reconstructed image implies a better performance of the second discriminative network. Moreover, as in Figure 7, it’s clear how validation curves are much better in our (red) model, compared to the vanilla one (orange), especially in the first phase of the training; reducing, thus, the number of needed epochs for obtaining an acceptable result for an industrial process. On the other hand, embedding similarity-based network, like PatchCore, seems to have a better pixelwise AUROC score. But because of the nature itself of the architecture, it is not possible to add, in an easy way, an attention module based on ROIs. 17 0.06 0.08 0.1 0.12 0.14 0.16 0.18 0.2 0.22 0.24 0.26 0.28 0.3 -20 0 20 40 60 80 100 120 140 160 180 200 22 (a) Validation contextual loss -0.02 00.02 0.04 0.06 0.08 0.1 0.12 0.14 0.16 0.18 -20 0 20 40 60 80 100 120 140 160 180 200 22 (b) Validation Focal Loss 

Figure 7: Validation losses for generative (a) and discriminative (b) sub-networks. Red curve is obtained during training of our model, the orange one is obtained with the vanilla model. It is evident that the learning curve is much better in our case, for both nets. 

## 8.2 GRD-Net with ROI 

In the second experiment was tested the capability of learning an interest region within the image in which and only in which spot and locate the anomalies. Zipper and Hazelnut datasets were used for the purpose. Zipper, especially, is particularly suitable, since samples have 2 logic regions of interest: the zipper area itself and the fabric area. In our case we used as region of interest the zipper part, so we would exclude defects on the fabric zone. An example is showed in Figure 8. As previously explained in Section 7.3, discriminative network was trained using as focal loss variable intersection between ROI and the mask generated from Perlin noise. In this way, the net will start generalizing not only how to spot anomalies from differences between original and reconstructed images, but also where is located the area in which look for differences. In fact, in most industrial cases, the totality of the image is not important; indeed, sometimes it could be misleading, as there may be anomalies within the frame that are not part of the product itself. In order to obtain this result, were created a ROI for each training image and the focal loss was customized as explained in Paragraph 7.3, namely by intersecting mask during training and the aforementioned region of interest. Thus, the discriminative network learn to generalize the most important part of the image, where to focus the attention. 

## 8.3 Real-Case Experiment 

The studied model was used in a real-case industrial process to perform a quality control on pharmaceutical BFS strips of vials. Tests are performed by a Bon-figlioli Engineering automatic machine, with a rotary carousel with a tracker where are installed acquiring sensors. Training set is composed by 230355 im-ages of vials, acquired in 3 different areas by a on-line camera, during production process. For reasons related to non-disclosure agreements, we cannot show full 18 (a) Original image ( X) (b) Reconstructed image by the Generator G ( ˆX)

(c) Ground truth ( M )

(d) Generated heatmap by 

discriminative model 

(e) Generated heatmap by 

discriminative model af-ter average pooling with 21 × 21 kernel 

(f) Result generated anomaly localization region ( ˆM )

(g) Original image with regions: 

blue region is the ROI ; the or-ange region is the ground truth (M ); and finally the red region is the generated region ( ˆM )

(h) Image generated overim-posing the convoluted heatmap from the discriminative net to 

X, and colorizing it with jet 

color-map 

Figure 8: Especially significant example from zipper dataset in which we could spot 3 anomalies: one in the zipper, one in the middle of fabric part and another, the last, on the border of the fabric zone. As we can see, the only spotted is the one in the zipper region, perfectly inside ROI, and almost perfectly aligned with the ground truth defect region. 19 (a) Floating black parti-cle on meniscus, near the      

> shoulder of the vial
> (b) Black spot near the meniscus
> (c) Scratch at the turn of horizontal engraving

Figure 9: 3 examples of real cases where algorithmic analysis is difficult, if not almost impossible. product images, but only a limited area, that cover one of most interesting part to our aim. Strips consist of 5 plastic material, namely BFS, vials, stick to each other on the side, liquid filled. Because of these features, one of the most challenging areas is the meniscus region. This due to the great randomness and variability of the aforementioned meniscus. Its own shape and the possibility that there could be bubbles under it or liquid drops over it, make very difficult to treat this region using only classical blob-analysis algorithms. In Figure 9 are shown 3 real-case examples where blob-analysis is almost im-possible due to the variability of the meniscus shape and the shadows generated by the shape of the product itself and the position of the sensor in relation of the product.      

> Best results on 30 epochs training Best AUROC per image Best AUROC per pixel Best accuracy
> Vials on meniscus area 0.981 0.996 0.932

Table 6: Real-case experiment statistics after 30 epochs of training. 

With our network we managed to localize those anomalies, with good result, acceptable compared to human and classical algorithms scores. These results could be seen in the Figure 10 and in the table 6. 

## 8.4 Ablation study 

The GRD-Net architecture is analyzed, evaluating the network generative model and the loss of the discriminative part. 20 Case 1: 

(a) Original image X

with dark floating parti-cle on meniscus 

(b) Generated heatmap ˆM normalized between 0 and 1 

(c) Defect localization after convolution and threshold 

Case 2: 

(d) Original image X

with black spot on vial surface 

(e) Generated heatmap ˆM normalized between 0 and 1 

(f) Defect localization after convolution and threshold 

Case 3: 

(g) Original image X (h) Generated heatmap ˆM normalized between 0 and 1 

(i) Defect localization after convolution and threshold 

Case 4: 

(j) Original image X

without defect but asystem of bubble near meniscus 

(k) Generated heatmap ˆM normalized between 0 and 1 

(l) Defect localization after convolution and threshold 

Figure 10: Visual results on real case experiment. First 3 images represent a defect, the last a regular product really difficult to spot. 21 (a) Original pill im-age ( X)            

> (b) Pill image with Perlin noise X(n)
> ( ˆX)
> (c) Pill image rebuilt by GRD-Net with CRAE ( ˆX)
> (d) Pill image re-built by GRD-Net with DRAE ( ˆX)

Figure 11: Pill in picture (a) is the original one from train set, pill in (b) is the original with Perlin noise superimposed. Last two images are the output from the generative subnetwork. (c) is from the full-convolutional residual autoen-coder (CRAE), (d) is from the dense-bottleneck residual autoencoder (DRAE). It is clear that the capability to rebuild the original image is much higher in fully-convolutional residual autoencoder (CRAE) networks, especially for the little details on the texture. 

8.4.1 Generative Model 

The generative sub-net, namely the reconstructive part, was challenged starting from the SoA described in DRÆM paper [6], in 4.2. Ablation Study - Archi-tecture sub-section. Adding GAN structure with a residual autoencoder. The latter has been tested using a full-convolutional bottleneck , with a latent size of 

z = 32 × 8 × 8 and a dense bottleneck , with a latent size of z = 2048. As previ-ously shown, best performance were obtained using our GAN architecture, with a fully-convolutional residual autoencoder (CRAE). Dense-bottleneck residual autoencoder (DRAE), in the other hand, it is a good alternative, and in some cases is better in anomaly removal task, but is less capable of learning the aleatory areas. A good example, shown in Figure 11, is pill dataset, whose pills, used as examples, have a random-like dotted reddish texture, that is better reproduced with a fully-convolutional bottleneck. 

8.4.2 Discriminative Model Loss 

Discriminative model loss was originally composed by Focal Loss added to the 

Crossentropy Overlap Distance Loss [50, 51]. Initial idea was that the second addendum would help to focus attention of the network only into the ROI area. So first idea was: 

Loverlap (Adiscr , ROI input ) = w(1 − |A discr ∩ ROI input |

min( |A discr , ROI input |) ). (8) with w ∈ [0 , 1]. Where Loverlap is the contribution of the Crossentropy Overlap Distance Loss in the discriminative Loss, w is an hyper-parameter, Adiscr is 22 the area mask generated by the discriminative network and ROI input is the reference ROI 

LF L = FL (Adiscr , Minput ) + Loverlap (Adiscr , ROI input ). (9) This loss led the disciminative network to focusing on the ROI, but also led to highlight all the ROI area on the heatmap generated as disciminative net out-put. This because the (8) meant that the Adiscr region tends to ROI input · w.In order to prevent this issue we performed 4 experiments, with 4 different variations of the LF L :1. For the first experiment we used the (9). 2. For the second trial we used the vanilla focal loss , but with the intersection, as in the equation (5), I = |A discr ∩ ROI input | = Adiscr × ROI input , as focal loss function input. 3. For the third experiment we added to the vanilla loss with the input explained in the previous point, the overlap custom loss. 4. For the fourth, and last, test we negated the overlap function to not in-tersect 1 − ROI input 

Best results, both visually (as shown in Figure 12) and numerically (as shown in table 7), were obtained using the method 2. This due to the tendency to carry min( Adiscr ∩ ROI input ), to be w. Similar results were obtained on zipper dataset, that was a good benchmark for real-case defects that, on same image, appear both inside and outside the ROI, as illustrated in Figure 8.               

> AUROC per image (pixel) at 100 epochs AUROC AUROX pixel Accuracy Case 1. 99.4 94.3 94.6 Case 2. 100.0 95.3 100.0
> Case 3. 99.9 91.6 99.1 Case 4. 100.0 93.5 100.0

Table 7: AUROC score after 200 epochs of training per image and pixel. 

23 Case 1: 

(a) Original image X (b) Generated heatmap ˆM

(c) Colorized and super-imposed ˆM on X

Case 2: 

(d) Original image X (e) Generated heatmap ˆM

(f) Colorized and super-imposed ˆM on X

Case 3: 

(g) Original image X (h) Generated heatmap ˆM

(i) Colorized and super-imposed ˆM on X

Case 4: 

(j) Original image X (k) Generated heatmap ˆM

(l) Colorized and super-imposed ˆM on X

Figure 12: Visual comparison between 4 losses, for the discriminative network. Second case is the more clear, that segment better only the anomalous areas. 24 9 Conclusions 

The aim of this work is to create an anomaly detection network that pay atten-tion mainly to a specific part of an image, to avoid the identification of part of images containing noise defects in the background. This new architecture called Generative-Reconstructive-Discriminative Anomaly Detection with Region of Interest Attention Module network (GRD-Net) is based on two state-of-the-art anomaly detection network: GANomaly and DRÆM. GDR-Net is composed by a first generative-reconstructive part (GANomaly) trained to identify and re-construct anomalies, maintaining the non-anomalous regions of the input image. This first sub-model maps the input image to a lower dimension vector using encoder-decoder-encoder sub-networks, which are then used to reconstruct the generated output image. In order to learn joint anomaly inclusion reconstruction and create accurate anomaly segmentation maps, the second network combines the original and reconstructed image. In order to ensure that only the defects present on the surface of the inspected products are considered, in addition to the images of the dataset, the network is also given a segmentation mask that highlights the area of interest (AOI) of the product. This mask is multiplied by the anomaly detection mask generated by the discriminative network to obtain an intersection mask. This contribution is summed to the loss of the network. GRD-Net was tested on all MVTec-AD datasets, on an updated version of the zipper MVTec-AD dataset and on a real industrial dataset provided by com-pany Bonfiglioli Engineering, located in Ferrara (IT). Experiments show that GRD-Net performs better than both DRÆM and GANomaly not only in terms of performance (AUROC) but also in visual terms. In fact, the experiments show that the attention module allows GRD-Net to identify as real defects only those that are in the AOI of the product. In this way, the noise introduced by random variations in the background makes no negative contribution to the performance and reliability of the system created. 25 References 

[1] Dor Bank, Noam Koenigstein, and Raja Giryes. Autoencoders. CoRR ,abs/2003.05991, 2020. [2] Umberto Michelucci. An introduction to autoencoders. CoRR ,abs/2201.03898, 2022. [3] Diederik P. Kingma and Max Welling. An introduction to variational au-toencoders. CoRR , abs/1906.02691, 2019. [4] Diederik P Kingma and Max Welling. Auto-encoding variational bayes, 2013. [5] Ian Goodfellow, Jean Pouget-Abadie, Mehdi Mirza, Bing Xu, David Warde-Farley, Sherjil Ozair, Aaron Courville, and Yoshua Bengio. Generative adversarial networks. Communications of the ACM , 63(11):139–144, 2020. [6] Vitjan Zavrtanik, Matej Kristan, and Danijel Skoˇ caj. Draem-a discrimi-natively trained reconstruction embedding for surface anomaly detection. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer Vision , pages 8330–8339, 2021. [7] Samet Akcay, Amir Atapour-Abarghouei, and Toby P Breckon. Ganomaly: Semi-supervised anomaly detection via adversarial training. In Asian con-ference on computer vision , pages 622–637. Springer, 2018. [8] Chathurika Wickramasinghe, Daniel Marino, and Milos Manic. Resnet autoencoders for unsupervised feature learning from high-dimensional data: Deep models resistant to performance degradation. IEEE Access , PP:1–1, 03 2021. [9] Samet Ak¸ cay, Amir Atapour-Abarghouei, and Toby P Breckon. Skip-ganomaly: Skip connected and adversarially trained encoder-decoder anomaly detection. In 2019 International Joint Conference on Neural Net-works (IJCNN) , pages 1–8. IEEE, 2019. [10] Paul Bergmann, Sindy L¨ owe, Michael Fauser, David Sattlegger, and Carsten Steger. Improving unsupervised defect segmentation by applying structural similarity to autoencoders. arXiv preprint arXiv:1807.02011 ,2018. [11] Dong Gong, Lingqiao Liu, Vuong Le, Budhaditya Saha, Moussa Reda Man-sour, Svetha Venkatesh, and Anton van den Hengel. Memorizing normality to detect anomaly: Memory-augmented deep autoencoder for unsupervised anomaly detection. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International Con-ference on Computer Vision , pages 1705–1714, 2019. [12] Shashanka Venkataramanan, Kuan-Chuan Peng, Rajat Vikram Singh, and Abhijit Mahalanobis. Attention guided anomaly localization in images. In 

European Conference on Computer Vision , pages 485–503. Springer, 2020. 26 [13] Stanislav Pidhorskyi, Ranya Almohsen, and Gianfranco Doretto. Genera-tive probabilistic novelty detection with adversarial autoencoders. Advances in neural information processing systems , 31, 2018. [14] Mohammad Sabokrou, Mohammad Khalooei, Mahmood Fathy, and Ehsan Adeli. Adversarially learned one-class classifier for novelty detection. In 

Proceedings of the IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern recog-nition , pages 3379–3388, 2018. [15] Xuan Xia, Xizhou Pan, Nan Li, Xing He, Lin Ma, Xiaoguang Zhang, and Ning Ding. Gan-based anomaly detection: A review. Neurocomputing ,493:497–535, 2022. [16] Paul Bergmann, Michael Fauser, David Sattlegger, and Carsten Steger. Mvtec ad–a comprehensive real-world dataset for unsupervised anomaly detection. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF conference on computer vision and pattern recognition , pages 9592–9600, 2019. [17] Xin Xie, Yuhui Huang, Weiye Ning, Dengquan Wu, Zixi Li, and Hao Yang. Rdad: A reconstructive and discriminative anomaly detection model based on transformer. International Journal of Intelligent Systems , 37(11):8928– 8946, 2022. [18] Pramuditha Perera, Ramesh Nallapati, and Bing Xiang. Ocgan: One-class novelty detection using gans with constrained latent representations. In 

Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition , pages 2898–2906, 2019. [19] Oliver Rippel, Patrick Mertens, and Dorit Merhof. Modeling the distribu-tion of normal data in pre-trained deep features for anomaly detection. In 

2020 25th International Conference on Pattern Recognition (ICPR) , pages 6726–6733. IEEE, 2021. [20] Liron Bergman, Niv Cohen, and Yedid Hoshen. Deep nearest neighbor anomaly detection. arXiv preprint arXiv:2002.10445 , 2020. [21] Paolo Napoletano, Flavio Piccoli, and Raimondo Schettini. Anomaly de-tection in nanofibrous materials by cnn-based self-similarity. Sensors ,18(1):209, 2018. [22] Niv Cohen and Yedid Hoshen. Sub-image anomaly detection with deep pyramid correspondences. arXiv preprint arXiv:2005.02357 , 2020. [23] Thomas Defard, Aleksandr Setkov, Angelique Loesch, and Romaric Au-digier. Padim: a patch distribution modeling framework for anomaly detec-tion and localization. In International Conference on Pattern Recognition ,pages 475–489. Springer, 2021. 27 [24] Karsten Roth, Latha Pemula, Joaquin Zepeda, Bernhard Sch¨ olkopf, Thomas Brox, and Peter Gehler. Towards total recall in industrial anomaly detection. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vi-sion and Pattern Recognition , pages 14318–14328, 2022. [25] Laurent Dinh, Jascha Sohl-Dickstein, and Samy Bengio. Density estimation using real nvp. arXiv preprint arXiv:1605.08803 , 2016. [26] Yong Shi, Jie Yang, and Zhiquan Qi. Unsupervised anomaly segmentation via deep feature reconstruction. Neurocomputing , 424:9–22, 2021. [27] Thomas Schlegl, Philipp Seeb¨ ock, Sebastian M Waldstein, Ursula Schmidt-Erfurth, and Georg Langs. Unsupervised anomaly detection with generative adversarial networks to guide marker discovery. In International conference on information processing in medical imaging , pages 146–157. Springer, 2017. [28] Thomas Schlegl, Philipp Seeb¨ ock, Sebastian M Waldstein, Georg Langs, and Ursula Schmidt-Erfurth. f-anogan: Fast unsupervised anomaly detec-tion with generative adversarial networks. Medical image analysis , 54:30– 44, 2019. [29] Marco Rudolph, Bastian Wandt, and Bodo Rosenhahn. Same same but differnet: Semi-supervised defect detection with normalizing flows. In Pro-ceedings of the IEEE/CVF winter conference on applications of computer vision , pages 1907–1916, 2021. [30] Denis Gudovskiy, Shun Ishizaka, and Kazuki Kozuka. Cflow-ad: Real-time unsupervised anomaly detection with localization via conditional normal-izing flows. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Winter Conference on Appli-cations of Computer Vision , pages 98–107, 2022. [31] Jaehyeok Bae, Jae-Han Lee, and Seyun Kim. Pni : Industrial anomaly detection using position and neighborhood information, 2023. [32] Paul Bergmann, Michael Fauser, David Sattlegger, and Carsten Steger. Un-informed students: Student-teacher anomaly detection with discriminative latent embeddings. CoRR , abs/1911.02357, 2019. [33] Paul Bergmann, Kilian Batzner, Michael Fauser, David Sattlegger, and Carsten Steger. Beyond dents and scratches: Logical constraints in un-supervised anomaly detection and localization. International Journal of Computer Vision , 130(4):947–969, Apr 2022. [34] Kilian Batzner, Lars Heckler, and Rebecca K¨ onig. Efficientad: Accurate visual anomaly detection at millisecond-level latencies, 2023. [35] Dan Li, Dacheng Chen, Lei Shi, Baihong Jin, Jonathan Goh, and See-Kiong Ng. Mad-gan: Multivariate anomaly detection for time series data with generative adversarial networks, 2019. 28 [36] Guangxuan Zhu, Hongbo Zhao, Haoqiang Liu, and Hua Sun. A novel lstm-gan algorithm for time series anomaly detection. pages 1–6, 10 2019. [37] Zijian Niu, Ke Yu, and Xiaofei Wu. Lstm-based vae-gan for time-series anomaly detection. Sensors , 20:3738, 07 2020. [38] Wenqian Jiang, Yang Hong, Xin He, and Cheng Cheng. A gan-based anomaly detection approach for imbalanced industrial time series. IEEE Access , PP:1–1, 09 2019. [39] Panagiotis Radoglou Grammatikis, Panagiotis Sarigiannidis, Georgios Ef-stathopoulos, and Emmanouil Panaousis. Aries: A novel multivariate in-trusion detection system for smart grid. Sensors , 20, 09 2020. [40] Ilias Siniosoglou, Panagiotis Radoglou Grammatikis, George Efstathopou-los, Panagiotis Fouliras, and Panagiotis Sarigiannidis. A unified deep learn-ing anomaly detection and classification approach for smart grid environ-ments. IEEE Transactions on Network and Service Management , PP, 05 2021. [41] Dongyue Chen, Lingyi Yue, Xingya Chang, Ming Xu, and Tong Jia. Nm-gan: Noise-modulated generative adversarial network for video anomaly detection. Pattern Recognition , 116:107969, 2021. [42] Ken Perlin. An image synthesizer. ACM Siggraph Computer Graphics ,19(3):287–296, 1985. [43] Zhou Wang, Alan C Bovik, Hamid R Sheikh, and Eero P Simoncelli. Image quality assessment: from error visibility to structural similarity. IEEE transactions on image processing , 13(4):600–612, 2004. [44] Ian Goodfellow, Yoshua Bengio, and Aaron Courville. Deep Learning . MIT Press, 2016. [45] Antonia Creswell, Tom White, Vincent Dumoulin, Kai Arulkumaran, Biswa Sengupta, and Anil A Bharath. Generative adversarial networks: An overview. IEEE signal processing magazine , 35(1):53–65, 2018. [46] Alireza Makhzani, Jonathon Shlens, Navdeep Jaitly, Ian Goodfellow, and Brendan Frey. Adversarial autoencoders. arXiv preprint arXiv:1511.05644 ,2015. [47] Mehdi Mirza and Simon Osindero. Conditional generative adversarial nets. 

arXiv preprint arXiv:1411.1784 , 2014. [48] Tsung-Yi Lin, Priya Goyal, Ross Girshick, Kaiming He, and Piotr Doll´ ar. Focal loss for dense object detection. In Proceedings of the IEEE interna-tional conference on computer vision , pages 2980–2988, 2017. [49] Kaiming He, Xiangyu Zhang, Shaoqing Ren, and Jian Sun. Deep residual learning for image recognition. CoRR , abs/1512.03385, 2015. 29 [50] Michele Fraccaroli, Alice Bizzarri, Paolo Casellati, and Evelina Lamma. Exploiting cnn’s visual explanations to drive anomaly detection. Submitted to Applied Intelligence, Springer. [51] Michele Fraccaroli, Alice Bizzarri, Paolo Casellati, and Evelina Lamma. Cross entropy overlap distance. Accepted and Presented at ITAL-IA 2022, workshop on AI for Industry, feb 2022. 30 Contents 

1 Abstract 12 Keywords 23 Acknowledgments 24 Nomenclature 25 Introduction 26 Related Work 57 Methods 6

7.1 DRÆM . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 77.2 GANomaly . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 87.2.1 Adversarial Autoencoders . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 87.2.2 Generative Adversarial Networks . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 87.2.3 GANomaly Architecture & Training . . . . . . . . . . . . 87.3 Generative-Reconstructive-Discriminative Network with Atten-tion Module . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 9

8 Experiments 13 

8.1 GAN with Residual AE . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13 8.2 GRD-Net with ROI . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 18 8.3 Real-Case Experiment . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 18 8.4 Ablation study . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 20 8.4.1 Generative Model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 22 8.4.2 Discriminative Model Loss . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 22 

9 Conclusions 25 

31