Title: TokenLight: Precise Lighting Control in Images using Attribute Tokens

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2604.15310v1

Published Time: Fri, 17 Apr 2026 01:22:56 GMT

Number of Pages: 32

Markdown Content:
# TokenLight : Precise Lighting Control in Images using Attribute Tokens 

## Sumit Chaturvedi 1∗ Yannick Hold-Geoffroy 2 Mengwei Ren 2 Jingyuan Liu 2

## He Zhang 1 Yiqun Mei 1 Julie Dorsey 1 Zhixin Shu 2†

1 Yale University 2 Adobe (i) Add a 3D virtual light anywhere in the image by specifying its 3D coordinates. Left to right: input, light behind, left, ri ght , front, and inside the pumpkin.   

> (ii) Simulate high -quality studio lighting for portrait photography. (iii) Relighting on challenging geometry/material (zoom -in on lion’s eyebrows).
> (iv) Control the light fixture —toggle it on or off and adjust its color. (v) Control shadow softness with our method.

Figure 1. TokenLight enables intuitive, flexible lighting edits for any image. Using a tokenized lighting-attribute design for diffusion transformers, it provides precise control over a light’s intensity, color, diffuseness, 3D location, and more. This enables effects like placing a light inside a pumpkin, adding back-lighting to a lion, simulating Rembrandt-style setups, diffusing shadows and shifting color tones. 

## Abstract 

This paper presents a method for image relighting that en-ables precise and continuous control over multiple illumi-nation attributes in a photograph. We formulate relight-ing as a conditional image generation task and introduce attribute tokens to encode distinct lighting factors such as intensity, color, ambient illumination, diffuse level, and 3D light positions. The model is trained on a large-scale syn-thetic dataset with ground-truth lighting annotations, sup-plemented by a small set of real captures to enhance real-

*Work done as an intern at Adobe Research. †Corresponding author. 

ism and generalization. We validate our approach across a variety of relighting tasks, including controlling in-scene lighting fixtures and editing environment illumination us-ing virtual light sources, on synthetic and real images. Our method achieves state-of-the-art quantitative and qualita-tive performance compared to prior work. Remarkably, without explicit inverse rendering supervision, the model exhibits an inherent understanding of how light interacts with scene geometry, occlusion, and materials, yielding convincing lighting effects even in traditionally challeng-ing scenarios such as placing lights within objects or re-lighting transparent materials plausibly. Project page: 

vrroom.github.io/tokenlight/ 

> arXiv:2604.15310v1 [cs.CV] 16 Apr 2026

## 1. Introduction 

Lighting control in images is a fundamental task in modern creative workflows, with broad applications in photography, post-production, visual effects, and mixed reality [1, 31]. The ability to precisely manipulate illumination not only en-hances aesthetic quality but also ensures visual consistency across scenes, objects, and composite elements. Tradition-ally, lighting is configured either through physical lighting equipment or within 3D rendering software, where such control becomes inaccessible once the image has been cap-tured or the scene has been rendered. Recent advances in image generation have enabled im-age relighting in various forms. The utility of these approaches is largely determined by how lighting is represented—namely, how the desired illumination condi-tions are encoded and controlled. Different representa-tions provide different levels of precision and flexibility in interacting with the scene in an image. Notably, text-driven relighting [9, 73] provides intuitive, language-based control, but relies on the model’s interpretation of user prompts, often resulting in imprecise or unpredictable out-comes. Background-image–based relighting [50, 73] offers limited information about the underlying illumination, re-stricting fine-grained control. Panoramic environment maps [10, 30, 31, 33, 44, 71], while capturing lighting from all di-rections, cannot model near-field or spatially localized illu-mination changes. Finally, inverse-rendering–based meth-ods [7, 48, 71, 75] recover scene geometry and material properties to enable lighting modification, but achieving high-quality relighting demands accurate 3D reconstruc-tion, which remains challenging, especially in single input view settings. Moreover, 2.5D approaches [8, 15, 31, 44] that estimate surface normals or depth maps provide only partial geometric cues and often fail to handle occlusions or light interactions across hidden surfaces. What is miss-ing is a representation that allows precise, interpretable, and spatially localized adjustments to illumination directly in the image domain—bridging the intuitive flexibility of 3D lighting tools with the accessibility of 2D image editing. To this end, we introduce TokenLight , a conditional im-age generation framework that employs a tokenized lighting representation, where physically meaningful tokens encode illumination attributes, to model and control distinct light-ing factors. Each attribute token corresponds to a light prop-erty such as intensity, color, diffuse level, or 3D spatial posi-tion, enabling continuous and incremental manipulation of lighting effects in a disentangled manner. This formulation allows TokenLight to produce realistic, geometry-aware re-lighting results without requiring 3D reconstruction, offer-ing a new level of precision and interpretability in image-based lighting control. Furthermore, it naturally extends to in-scene lighting control, such as turning individual light sources on or off within an image, by combining spatial masks for target light sources with attribute tokens speci-fying the desired illumination characteristics. Achieving physically meaningful control in relighting requires the model to understand how image appearance changes in response to precise combinations of lighting at-tributes. Consequently, model training demands accurate annotations of lighting variations, which are difficult to obtain in real-world settings but can be readily simulated in a modern 3D rendering software like Blender [5]. We therefore synthesize a large-scale dataset of 3D assets ren-dered under systematically varied lighting conditions using a path-tracing renderer, providing precise ground-truth su-pervision for each lighting attribute. With this dataset, we formulate relighting as an end-to-end conditional genera-tion process, taking control signals as input and directly re-rendering the desired output using a diffusion-based model. To build upon a strong visual prior, we leverage a foun-dation diffusion transformer pretrained for text-to-image and text-to-video generation, and fine-tune it on our curated dataset for controllable relighting. In addition, we incor-porate a small set of real-world captures in which lighting changes correspond to toggling in-scene light sources, fur-ther improving realism and generalization. We present three forms of practical lighting controls to demonstrate the strength and flexibility of our framework: (1) adding spatial virtual lights, (2) editing or diffusing en-vironment illumination, and (3) controlling in-scene light sources. We show that different combinations of attribute tokens enable rich and creative lighting manipulations. Our method is validated both qualitatively and quantitatively on real-world and synthetic datasets. Results demonstrate that our end-to-end control-to-render approach, without re-quiring explicit inverse graphics of the input image, ex-hibits strong reasoning ability and a robust understanding of light–scene interaction learned purely from synthetic data. For instance, one can use the model to place virtual lights behind objects (e.g., Fig. 8(i)) or inside a pumpkin to cre-ate a glowing jack-o’-lantern (see Fig. 1), or add lights near transparent surfaces to produce plausible shadows (see Fig. 7a). We summarize our contributions as follows: • Formulating a precise and continuous lighting control in images as an end-to-end image generation problem, where lighting attributes are combined with an input image to directly re-render the desired output using a diffusion-based model. • Introducing a compact, physically meaningful lighting-attribute token representation that unifies various relight-ing tasks within a diffusion transformer architecture. • Achieving state-of-the-art performance across multiple relighting tasks, showcasing the model’s reasoning abil-ity and robust understanding of light–scene interaction learned from synthetic supervision. 2. Related Work 

2.1. Relighting 

Relighting seeks to modify the illumination in images or videos while maintaining the original content’s appearance and identity. Early approaches relied on image-based tech-niques, where a reflectance field is constructed by capturing multiple images of a subject under varying illuminations. These captures are then used to synthesize relit images [13, 51, 66]. Later, methods adopted an inverse-rendering framework [2, 6, 11, 21, 29, 33, 67], where scene proper-ties such as geometry, materials, and lighting are estimated to enable re-rendering under novel illumination conditions. For a comprehensive review of these techniques, please re-fer to the survey in [14]. With the rise of generative imag-ing, especially diffusion models [25, 45, 52, 53], photoreal-istic image generation has become a practical reality. This progress has catalyzed a growing body of work that lever-ages natural image priors for relighting across diverse do-mains: objects [3, 30, 71], portraits [10, 43, 48, 50, 73], indoor scenes [4, 12, 41, 62, 65] and outdoor environments [19, 22, 32, 33]. Some of these methods still rely on ex-plicit scene property decomposition to enable user control. However, such intrinsic representations are often difficult to estimate reliably and unintuitive for end users to edit. In particular, accurately representing and editing precise light positions and near-field lighting effects remain a challenge within these frameworks. GenLit [3] addresses near-field effects through a view-agnostic lighting parameterization, which complicates local edits and can lead to incoherent lighting across regions of the image. In contrast, our approach introduces a unified token representation that directly couples lighting with the camera viewpoint. This compact and expressive representa-tion facilitates precise illumination editing, including view-tied placement of the light, and direct adjustment of chro-maticity and intensity for visible emitters. Our represen-tation can also handle all three common settings—indoor, outdoor, and object-centric—relatively well, as demon-strated in our experiments. 

2.2. Light Representations 

One key factor affecting relighting usability is the chosen lighting representation. Some approaches perform intrinsic image decomposition followed by re-synthesis under new lighting [33, 39, 72], typically using an environment map [30, 31, 33, 43, 44, 63, 71]. While these methods preserve identity and enable detailed edits, manipulating HDR irra-diance or environment maps is laborious and unintuitive for non-expert users. To simplify light editing, methods based on text prompts [9, 73], image harmonization [50, 77], or latent space traversal [4] offer greater usability but sacrifice fine-grained control, limiting precision in tasks such as ad-justing cast shadow directions. Another strategy involves cloning reference lighting from an exemplar [48, 55, 65], but requires an appropriate illumination reference, which is not always feasible. Simple user edits, such as scribbles for highlights and shadow [12, 42, 54] or direct shadow controls [15, 17, 18, 26, 27, 37, 70, 76], have also been explored, but lack a balance between editing simplicity and control effec-tiveness. Closest to our work are LightLab [41] and Careaga and Aksoy [8], which provide some of the most advanced yet simple editing controls. The former allows toggling on or off visible emitters via 2D masks but cannot insert or an-chor lights in 3D, while the latter exposes a 3D interface but remains a two-stage process that depends on explicit 2.5D reconstruction. This requirement makes handling occluded regions or material with complex properties such as skin and hair difficult, despite their neural rendering fixing pass. In contrast, our method preserves key 3D lighting affor-dances without requiring explicit scene reconstruction. By training end-to-end on synthetic data, supplemented with a small set of real data captured under controlled lighting changes [20, 41], our method circumvents many of the fail-ure modes associated with geometry and material estima-tion, while retaining user-friendly control and editability. 

## 3. Method 

Given a scene S and lighting L, the image is produced by a rendering function f : I = f (S, L ). Inverse rendering seeks 

S = g(I). For relighting, an incremental lighting edit ∆L

yields Ir = f (S, L r ) with Lr = L + ∆ L. Substituting S =

g(I) gives Ir = f (g(I), L + ∆ L) = R(I, ∆L), where R is a learned relighting operator, a function that only depends on the input image and lighting change. We parameterize 

∆L as: • Global ambient scaling: Lr = a · L, where a is a scalar. • Global diffuse-level control: a scalar dg that adjusts the diffuse level of the existing lighting; different values of 

dg yield different shadow softness and highlight roll-off. • Additional light source: ∆Ladd = ( p, c, λ, d ), where p

is the light position, c its color, λ its scalar intensity, and 

d a per-light diffuse-level control. • In-scene light sources: ∆Lin = (m, c, λ, t ), where 

m is a light mask defining in-image fixtures, c their color, λ their scalar intensity, and t a binary flag to in-dicate the transition, whether the light source is dim-ming/brightening. In TokenLight , ∆L is represented by a set of tokens that explicitly encode physical attributes (e.g., intensity coeffi-cients and 3D locations), up to an appropriate normalization factor. We model R with a conditional generative distribu-tion pθ such that Ir ∼ pθ ( · | I, ∆L), where pθ is parame-terized by a diffusion model (see Sec. 3.3). Left Lit Top Lit Right Lit              

> Front Lit Center Lit Back Lit
> Global ambient scaling ( )
> Global diffuse level control ( )
> In -scene light source control with mask ( )
> 3D Location ( )
> Intensity ( ) Color ( )
> x
> y
> z
> -1 1
> 1
> 1
> Additional Light Source
> x = -0.69 | y = 0.02 | z = 0.11 x = 0.09 | y = 0.00 | z = 0.91 x = 0.71 | y = 0.03 | z = 0.12
> x = 0.09 | y = -0.83 | z = 0.11 x = 0.04 | y = 0.03 | z = 0.21 x = 0.09 | y = 0.83 | z = 0.12

Figure 2. Overview of our data construction and lighting controls. We generate per-light renders, ambient images, and light-visibility masks to supervise the model. The system supports ambient scaling, global diffuse-level control, and masks for visible in-scene lights, and enables adding new lights at 3D positions with specified color and intensity. The bright light markers are visualization only. 

3.1. Datasets for Lighting Attributes Variation 

As shown in Fig. 2, we construct a dataset of controlled lighting attribute variations. Each sample is derived from a 3D scene S created in Blender and rendered using the Cy-cles physically based path tracer. Given a fixed scene S

and camera, we render one or more image pairs ⟨I, I r ⟩ un-der different lighting edits ∆L, sampled over combinations of the following attributes: (i) global ambient scale a, (ii) global diffuse level dg , (iii) an additional light ∆Ladd =(p, c, λ, d ), and (iv) in-scene fixtures ∆Lin = ( m, c, λ, t ).For global ambient scaling a, we modulate the intensity of an HDRi environment map or an ambient-color environ-ment texture. For global diffuse control dg , each scene is illuminated by an ambient term and a dominant area light; the diffuse level corresponds to the light’s angular spread, which governs the beam width and thus the softness of shadows—larger spreads yield broader illumination and smoother shading transitions. For the additional light term 

∆Ladd , we add a single point light defined by its position 

p, color c, intensity λ, and a radius factor d controlling the falloff and diffusion of light. The light position is specified relative to the camera for consistent editing behavior (see Sec. 3.2 for details). For the in-scene lighting term ∆Lin ,we employ an image-plane segmentation mask m to define target light source regions within the scene, whose intensity 

λ and color c are parameterized analogously to the added virtual light. Together, these configurations yield a diverse and physically grounded dataset of image pairs (I, I r ) with explicit supervision on the lighting attribute change ∆L.Our data is rendered from a diverse pool of 3D assets. For diffuse control and additional virtual-light edits, we use procedurally generated scenes built from a filtered Obja-verse subset [30], with optional ground and wall geome-try to catch shadows. We also add procedurally generated 3D humans following [10, 40, 64]. During rendering, each scene samples 64 point-light positions and may draw from among ∼600 HDRi from PolyHaven [47]. Diffuse control supervision is obtained with an area light rendered at 6 ran-dom spread angles, normalized to [0 , 1] for training. For in-scene lighting, we use 83 artist-authored in-door scenes with annotated visible fixtures and render each light’s contribution separately, producing ∼100K images. To complement the synthetic corpus, we capture ∼600 real indoor photographs. Rendered images are denoised and stored in linear RGB, producing aligned triplets (I, ∆L, I r )

that correspond to intended lighting edits; the real pho-tographs provide cross-domain realism and diversity and are used for paired supervision, with unknown lighting change attributes (e.g., color) dropped out. 

Paired Supervision Synthesis. To avoid exhaustively rendering every lighting variation, we generate supervision pairs on-the-fly by linearly combining pre-rendered lighting components in linear RGB. Each relit image is a weighted sum of an environment-map render (for ambient a) and a set of “on” light renders for additional-light and in-scene terms with attributes (p, m, d ). Ambient and light inten-sities (a, λ ) and color c are randomly sampled during data loading. Diffuse control dg is achieved by mixing light ren-ders with different angular spreads to vary shadow softness. All synthesized images are tone-mapped with the Reinhard operator [49]. Further details appear in the supplementary. 3.2. Scene-Agnostic Camera and Lighting 

Interactive 3D control requires the model to interpret 3D po-sition inputs from users, which in TokenLight are tokenized 3D coordinates. While existing works [8] typically recon-struct the 3D scene geometry to place lights in actual 3D space, our core design principle is to skip reconstruction and train a model to directly learn scene-light understand-ing. The key benefit of this design is that the input and in-teraction are scene-agnostic, though this introduces a chal-lenge in defining the coordinate system. Since users interact on a 2D image canvas, we define 3D coordinates relative to a camera. To implement this, we establish a reference co-ordinate system consisting of a camera and a 3D sampling volume. All scale-dependent lighting parameters (e.g., po-sition, size, intensity) are defined relative to this volume. In particular, we define a cube that can be placed in the scene at any scale or orientation. This cube establishes both the light sampling volume and the camera position relative to it. We define a canonical space local to the cube where all lighting parameters are sampled and the camera is fixed. By applying 3D similarity transformations ∈ Sim (3) to the cube, we enable the camera to capture any 3D region in the scene. Given two scenes S1 and S2 where S2 is a similarity-transformed version of S1, we can configure the light and camera such that the renderings appear nearly identical. In the reference space, we set the camera at position 

pcam , we sample light at position plight with energy E, and radius (diffuse level) d. Denoting the reference volume origin (center of cube) as C, the transformed cube cen-ter as Ct, and scale factor as s, the transformed parame-ters are computed as follows: the camera position becomes 

p′ 

> cam

= Ct + s · (pcam − C), the light position becomes 

p′ 

> light

= Ct + s · (plight − C), the light intensity scales to 

E′ = s2 ·E to compensate for inverse-square falloff, and the light radius scales to d′ = s · d to maintain apparent angular size. This transformation ensures that the rendered appear-ance remains invariant under similarity transformations of the scene. In practice, we render the scene using the trans-formed camera and light parameters (p′

> cam

, p′

> light

, E ′, d ′),while tokenizing the lighting attributes using the canonical reference parameters (e.g., plight and d) for model input. For details on rotations, translations, and camera intrinsics, and illustrative diagrams, please see the supplementary. 

3.3. Modeling Lighting Edits with Diffusion Model 

We model the conditional distribution p(Ir |I, ∆L) using a latent diffusion transformer [45, 52] that predicts how an input image changes under a specified lighting edit. As de-picted in Fig. 3, both the encoded image tokens and the lighting-edit tokens are concatenated into a single sequence and processed jointly with full self-attention [60], allowing the transformer to reason about spatial content and lighting control within the same token space.         

> Figure 3. Architecture overview, shown here for the 3D light–position training case. The model takes an input image and light edit attributes; e.g., to add a red light while dimming ambient illumination. For other light attributes, see Sec. 3.3.

Lighting Attribute Tokens. Scalar lighting attributes in 

∆L—such as ambient scaling a, intensity λ, diffuse con-trols (d, d g ), and the transition flag t—are each encoded into tokens using Gaussian Fourier features [59] with a per-attribute projection matrix B ∼ N (0 , σ 2). Vector attributes, i.e., 3D position p = ( x, y, z ) and color c = ( r, g, b ), are flattened into one token per component, yielding a uniform token structure across all lighting parameters. The light mask m is encoded into image latent space via the VAE en-coder and flattened into a token sequence. Finally, the input image tokens are concatenated with the ∆L tokens forming the full conditioning sequence. These are concatenated to the noisy target latent (see Fig. 3). Corresponding image patches share identical positional embeddings [58]. 

Training objective. The model is trained using a flow-matching objective [34, 35], which learns a time-dependent velocity field that transports noisy latents toward data la-tents along straight-line paths. Conditioning is provided by the input image I and its associated lighting edit ∆L. Given a data latent X ∼ p(· | I, ∆L) and base noise ϵ ∼ N (0, I),we form the interpolant zτ = (1 − τ ) ϵ + τ X, where 

τ ∈ [0 , 1] . The network uθ (zτ , τ, I, ∆L) is trained to pre-dict the target velocity X − ϵ, minimizing: 

L(θ) = Eτ, X, ϵ

h

uθ (zτ , τ, I, ∆L) − (X − ϵ) 22

i

. (1) 

3.4. Implementation Details 

We initialize from a pretrained text-to-video checkpoint and train in bfloat16 using FSDP [78]. We use AdamW [38] (lr 

= 10 −5, weight decay  = 0 .01 , β = (0 .9, 0.95) ), a global batch size of  160 , and  960 -px inputs. Training runs for 

15 , 000  steps ( ≈2 days) on 16 ×A100-80GB GPUs. Infer-ence uses DDIM sampler [56] with 50 steps. Classifier-free guidance [24] is applied only to the light-token condition-ing (not input portrait/masks): we form the unconditional branch by dropping  ∆L and use guidance scale  w = 2 . We set the scale of Gaussian Fourier features  σ = 5 .Table 1. Synthetic data evaluation, comparing against environment-map–based relighting methods Neural Gaffer [30] and DiffusionRenderer [33]. Best results in bold.                                  

> Method PSNR ↑SSIM ↑LPIPS ↓
> PanoGT DiffusionRenderer [33] 13.5106 0.9395 0.0394 Neural Gaffer [30] 16.7183 0.9446 0.0412
> TokenLight 21.2416 0.9724 0.0228 PointGT DiffusionRenderer [33] 13.5338 0.9374 0.0402 Neural Gaffer [30] 16.7595 0.9436 0.0415
> TokenLight 21.9772 0.9759 0.0210
> PanoGT 31.5661 0.9897 0.0077 PSNR=13.81 PSNR=12.89 PSNR=16.89 PSNR=24.60
> PointGT DiffusionRenderer [33]
> PSNR=8.33
> Neural Gaffer [30]
> PSNR=17.95
> Ours
> PSNR=18.72
> PanoGT
> PSNR=19.94
> Input

Figure 4. Synthetic data evaluation with Neural Gaffer [30] and DiffusionRenderer [33]. Ground-truth relighting is provided both as point-light renders and as point-lights projected into environ-ment maps, and we report results for both settings. 

## 4. Experiments 

Sec. 4.1 presents quantitative results: (1) a synthetic dataset for analyzing spatial relighting (2) precision of spatial light-ing (3) user study on spatial lighting and (4) evaluation on a real-world captured dataset with controllable light fixtures. Sec. 4.2 provides qualitative comparisons with prior meth-ods. Sec. 4.3 shows in-the-wild results and applications. 

4.1. Quantitative Evaluation 

Synthetic Evaluation We evaluate TokenLight ’s perfor-mance on spatial lighting control on a synthetic bench-mark, against two environment-map-based relighting meth-ods:Neural Gaffer [30] and DiffusionRenderer [33]. We randomly sample 200 Objaverse objects from our test set. Each sample has (i) input render under ambient lighting and (ii) two targets where the subject is rendered with ei-ther a point light (PointGT) or its environment-map surro-gate (PanoGT), described below. We report metrics PSNR, SSIM, LPIPS [74] computed on the masked object regions. We render point lights as environment maps for environment-map baselines and render objects under these maps to obtain the PanoGT targets, which serve as a fairer ground truth for environment-map methods. Since point lights induce inverse-square falloff, self-occlusion, and position-dependent penumbrae—unlike the distant, di-rectionally uniform illumination assumed by environment maps—we render scenes at multiple scales. Shrinking the object relative to the light source reduces near-field effects, better matching the environment-map regime. 

Table 2. User Study.   

> GenLit [3] Careaga [8] Ours preferred 77.5 %89.2 %

Table 3. Precision Analysis.               

> Method B/A ↑A↓
> Neural Gaffer [30] 1.111 0.160
> TokenLight 1.877 0.049 (ii) Our outputs along trajectory
> (a) (b) (c) (d)
> (i) Example Trajectory
> Neural Gaffer Ours Ground Truth
> (iii) Precision comparison with Neural Gaffer [30]

Figure 5. Example trajectory and confusion maps measure preci-sion as sensitivity ( B/A ↑) and accuracy ( A ↓). Our method is closer to ground truth than Neural Gaffer [30]. Table 4. Quantitative results on VisibleFixture-60, comparing against ScribbleLight [12]. Best results in bold.            

> Method PSNR ↑SSIM ↑LPIPS ↓
> ScribbleLight [12] 14.6356 0.5186 0.6114
> TokenLight 20.0772 0.8476 0.2784 Input Ground Truth Ours
> (i)
> (ii)
> ScribbleLight [12 ]

Figure 6. VisibleFixture-60. We show two cases: (i) turning a light on produces reflections and shadows that closely match the ground truth; (ii) turning the light off removes all cast shadows. 

We report results averaged over all scales. TokenLight 

outperforms baselines on PointGT and PanoGT targets (see Tab. 1, Fig. 4), demonstrating strong spatial lighting control. 

Precision Analysis To evaluate precision of TokenLight 

to light positions, we construct a benchmark with 50 Ob-javerse test objects. For each object, we evaluate six lin-ear point-light trajectories (32 steps) along three axes (two trajectories/axis). Given an ambient input, we predict relit images for each light position, and compare against ground-truth renders using foreground-masked MSE. To measure how well the model distinguishes nearby light positions, we create a confusion matrix M ∈ R32 ×32 ,where Mij denotes the error between the prediction condi-tioned on light position j and the ground truth (GT) ren-dered at light position i. M captures both accuracy (low diagonal error) and sensitivity (off-diagonal error increas-ing with trajectory distance). In Tab. 3, we report A (lower is better) and B/A (higher is better), where A, B are: (i) Relit glass shows plausible shadows from transparent material. (ii) Portrait relighting with varied 3D light placements. (v) Added light to the scene, moved to a new position and changed color. (iii) Fixed light position with changing diffuse level. (iv) V irtual light added to different positions in a cluttered scene. (a) Spatial control in in-the-wild testing cases. For each example we show input (left) and three relit results (right). (iii) Control portrait shadow softness via ambient light diffusion. (ii) Shadow removal via ambient light diffusion.  

> (i) Continuous ambient illumination intensity control.

(b) Each example shows the input on the left and relit outputs on the right, demonstrating environment-lighting control through ambient dimming, document de-shadowing, and progressive increases in global diffuse level in portraits. 

(c) Examples showing fine-grained manipulation of visible light intensity and color enabling precise per-light adjustments. 

Figure 7. In-the-wild examples showcasing the method’s precise lighting control. Best viewed on a screen—zoom in for details. 

A = 132 

32 X

i=1 

Mii , B =

P

i̸=j |i − j|Mij 

P

i̸=j |i − j| (2) In Fig. 5, we show results along an example trajectory and the confusion maps. We include a GT vs. GT reference. Our method achieves lower A, higher B/A , and confusion maps closer to GT than Neural Gaffer, indicating more pre-cise spatial light control. 

User Study We evaluate spatial lighting via a user study on in-the-wild images where participants select results that better match target lighting reference with higher image quality. TokenLight is preferred over both GenLit and Careaga et al. (Tab. 2). Details are in the supplementary. 

Visible-fixture pairs (in-the-wild). We evaluate on 60 real-world captured on/off image pairs where individual light fixtures can be toggled, with binary masks indicating each fixture. We construct a test set called VisibleFixture-60 and report PSNR, SSIM, LPIPS, comparing with Scribble-Light [12]. Each fixture is tested in both directions (off →on and on →off), by swapping input and target images and con-ditioning both models accordingly (see Tab. 4 and Fig. 6). Our method produces visually consistent and physically plausible relighting effects that closely match ground truth. In Fig. 6(i), the light reflects naturally off the table and casts shadows from the bottles. In Fig. 6(ii), turning the light off correctly removes all corresponding shadows, demonstrat-ing accurate light-geometry interaction. (i)    

> (ii)
> (iii)
> Input Careaga et al . [8] Ours
> Back Lit Right Lit
> Careaga et al . [8] Ours

Figure 8. Relighting comparison with Careaga et al. [8]. (i) Back-lit Barbie example where the light source produces a rim; (ii) a teddy-bear scene illustrating realistic relighting of fine fur; and (iii) a porcelain statue showing specular highlights. (i)            

> (ii)
> Input GenLit [3] Ours
> Top Lit Back Lit
> (iii)
> Center Lit Right Lit
> GenLit [3] Ours
> GenLit [3] Ours GenLit [3] Ours Input

Figure 9. Comparison with GenLit [3]: (i) Centered pumpkin light reproduced only by ours; (ii) Frontal view where both place the top light correctly; (iii) Low-angle view where GenLit’s top light drifts, while ours remains consistent. 

4.2. Qualitative Comparisons 

We compare with recent relighting methods: GenLit [3], Careaga et al. [8], and LightLab [41]. Since all are closed-source, results for GenLit and Careaga et al. were pro-duced by authors on an in-the-wild test set we created, while LightLab results are from their publication. GenLit and Careaga et al. are among the few methods supporting spatially controllable relighting. GenLit condi-tions a diffusion model on global light coordinates while sampling random camera viewpoints during training, cou-pling camera orientation with spatial light interpretation. Our scene-agnostic design avoids this. In Fig. 9, we show three examples: (i) for a centered light on a pumpkin, our method reproduces the lighting while GenLit does not; (ii) ours yields a stronger backlit effect; and (iii) for a low-angle view with the same top-light specification, GenLit’s place-ment drifts sideways while ours stays consistent, indicating that GenLit’s spatial behavior depends on camera configu-ration and scene content, causing inconsistent interaction. We provide more stable and predictable spatial control. Careaga et al. adopt a two-stage pipeline that recon-structs a 2.5D scene representation before neural render-ing. This approach often falters in scenes with heavy oc-clusion or materials exhibiting semi-transparency or view-dependent effects. As shown in Fig. 8, our method produces convincing backlit hair with natural translucency and accu-rately captures specular highlights on the porcelain figurine, whereas their method struggles with these phenomena. Our method offers similar results, compared to Light-Lab, for turning visible light-fixtures on/off. We present this comparison in the supplementary. 

4.3. In-the-wild Results 

Add 3D Light in 2D Image. We demonstrate a wide range of spatial lighting effects across diverse scenarios in Fig. 7a. Our method handles challenging materials, pro-ducing plausible shadows when relighting transparent glass (Fig. 7a(i)) and high-fidelity relighting of hair (Fig. 7a(ii)). It works well with both simple objects (Fig. 7a(iii)) and clut-tered scenes (Fig. 7a(iv)). The model’s understanding of complex scene geometry enables nuanced light placements, such as positioning a light behind a book to illuminate the portraits of a coven or inside a temple dome (Fig. 7a(v)). 

Ambient lighting controls. We show diverse ambient light controls in Fig. 7b. In Fig. 7b(i), progressively turning down the ambient lighting continuously lowers the intensity of background lighting from the window, focusing the scene on the main character. Diffuse ambient lighting enables us to remove shadows on documents cleanly (Fig. 7b(ii)) or gradually soften shadows on a portrait (Fig. 7b(iii)). 

Visible in-scene light intensity controls. Our tokenized intensity and color parameters can be combined with masks for in-scene lighting adjustment, enabling realistic lamp on/off effects and color control (Fig. 7c). 

## 5. Conclusion 

We presented TokenLight , a diffusion-based framework for image relighting that achieves precise, continuous control over multiple illumination attributes. By encoding light-ing parameters such as intensity, color, diffuse level and 3D position into a compact, token-based representation, our method directly maps an input image and lighting edit to a relit output without explicit inverse rendering. Trained on a large-scale synthetic dataset with additional real captures, 

TokenLight attains state-of-the-art performance across di-verse relighting tasks and demonstrates a robust learned un-derstanding of light–scene interaction. We discuss limita-tions and future work in the supplementary. Acknowledgements 

We thank Weijie Lyu for insightful discussions and the par-ticipants of our user study. We also thank Shrisha Bharad-waj, Chris Careaga, and Nadav Magar for providing com-parisons with their respective methods. Finally, we thank Kalyan Sunkavalli and Nathan Carr for their support. 

## References 

[1] Miika Aittala. Inverse lighting and photorealistic rendering for augmented reality. Vis. Comput. , 26(6–8):669–678, 2010. 2[2] Jonathan T. Barron and Jitendra Malik. Shape, Illumination, and Reflectance from Shading. IEEE Trans. Pattern Anal. Mach. Intell. , 37(8):1670–1687, 2015. 3 [3] Shrisha Bharadwaj, Haiwen Feng, Giorgio Becherini, Victo-ria Fernandez Abrevaya, and Michael J. Black. GenLit: Re-formulating Single-Image Relighting as Video Generation. 

arXiv preprint arxiv:2412.11224 , 2025. 3, 6, 8, 10 [4] Anand Bhattad, James Soole, and D.A. Forsyth. StyLitGAN: Image-based Relighting via Latent Control. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pat-tern Recognition (CVPR) , 2024. 3 [5] Blender Online Community. Blender: Open-source 3d cre-ation suite, 2025. Version 4.2 LTS. 2 [6] Mark Boss, Raphael Braun, Varun Jampani, Jonathan T. Barron, Ce Liu, and Hendrik P.A. Lensch. NeRD: Neu-ral Reflectance Decomposition from Image Collections . In 

2021 IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer Vi-sion (ICCV) , pages 12664–12674, Los Alamitos, CA, USA, 2021. IEEE Computer Society. 3 [7] Ziqi Cai, Kaiwen Jiang, Shu-Yu Chen, Yu-Kun Lai, Hongbo Fu, Boxin Shi, and Lin Gao. Real-time 3d-aware portrait video relighting. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Confer-ence on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR) ,pages 6221–6231, 2024. 2 [8] Chris Careaga and Ya˘ gız Aksoy. Physically controllable re-lighting of photographs. In Proceedings of the Special Inter-est Group on Computer Graphics and Interactive Techniques Conference Conference Papers , New York, NY, USA, 2025. Association for Computing Machinery. 2, 3, 5, 6, 8, 9 [9] Junuk Cha, Mengwei Ren, Krishna Kumar Singh, He Zhang, Yannick Hold-Geoffroy, Seunghyun Yoon, HyunJoon Jung, Jae Shin Yoon, and Seungryul Baek. Text2relight: creative portrait relighting with text guidance. In Proceedings of the Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence and Thirty-Seventh Conference on Innovative Applications of Ar-tificial Intelligence and Fifteenth Symposium on Educational Advances in Artificial Intelligence . AAAI Press, 2025. 2, 3 [10] Sumit Chaturvedi, Mengwei Ren, Yannick Hold-Geoffroy, Jingyuan Liu, Julie Dorsey, and Zhixin Shu. Synthlight: Por-trait relighting with diffusion model by learning to re-render synthetic faces. Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition , 2025. 2, 3, 4 [11] Wenzheng Chen, Joey Litalien, Jun Gao, Zian Wang, Clement Fuji Tsang, Sameh Khamis, Or Litany, and Sanja Fidler. DIB-R++: learning to predict lighting and material with a hybrid differentiable renderer. In Proceedings of the 35th International Conference on Neural Information Pro-cessing Systems , Red Hook, NY, USA, 2021. Curran Asso-ciates Inc. 3 [12] Jun Myeong Choi, Annie Wang, Pieter Peers, Anand Bhat-tad, and Roni Sengupta. ScribbleLight: Single Image Indoor Relighting with Scribbles. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR) , pages 5720–5731, 2025. 3, 6, 7 [13] Paul Debevec, Tim Hawkins, Chris Tchou, Haarm-Pieter Duiker, Westley Sarokin, and Mark Sagar. Acquiring the reflectance field of a human face. In Proceedings of the 27th Annual Conference on Computer Graphics and In-teractive Techniques , page 145–156, USA, 2000. ACM Press/Addison-Wesley Publishing Co. 3 [14] Farshad Einabadi, Jean-Yves Guillemaut, and Adrian Hilton. Deep Neural Models for Illumination Estimation and Re-lighting: A Survey. Computer Graphics Forum , 40(6):315– 331, 2021. 3 [15] Yotam Erel, Rishabh Dabral, Vladislav Golyanik, Amit H. Bermano, and Christian Theobalt. Practilight: Practical light control using foundational diffusion models, 2025. 2, 3 [16] Ye Fang, Zeyi Sun, Shangzhan Zhang, Tong Wu, Yinghao Xu, Pan Zhang, Jiaqi Wang, Gordon Wetzstein, and Dahua Lin. RelightVid: Temporal-Consistent Diffusion Model for Video Relighting. arXiv preprint arXiv:2501.16330 , 2025. 5 [17] Fr´ ed´ eric Fortier-Chouinard, Zitian Zhang, Louis-Etienne Messier, Mathieu Garon, Anand Bhattad, and Jean-Franc ¸ois Lalonde. Spotlight: Shadow-guided object relighting via dif-fusion. arXiv preprint arXiv:2411.18665 , 2024. 3 [18] David Futschik, Kelvin Ritland, James Vecore, Sean Fanello, Sergio Orts-Escolano, Brian Curless, Daniel Sykora, and Ro-hit Pandey. Controllable Light Diffusion for Portraits . In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR) , pages 8412–8421, Los Alamitos, CA, USA, 2023. IEEE Computer Society. 3 [19] David Griffiths, Tobias Ritschel, and Julien Philip. Out-cast: Outdoor single-image relighting with cast shadows. In 

Computer Graphics Forum , pages 179–193. Wiley Online Library, 2022. 3 [20] Paul Haeberli. Synthetic Lighting for Photography. https: / / www . graficaobscura . com / synth / index . html , 1992. Accessed: 2025-10-19. 3 [21] Jon Hasselgren, Nikolai Hofmann, and Jacob Munkberg. Shape, light, and material decomposition from images us-ing monte carlo rendering and denoising. In Proceedings of the 36th International Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems , Red Hook, NY, USA, 2022. Curran As-sociates Inc. 3 [22] Kai He, Ruofan Liang, Jacob Munkberg, Jon Hasselgren, Nandita Vijaykumar, Alexander Keller, Sanja Fidler, Igor Gilitschenski, Zan Gojcic, and Zian Wang. Unirelight: Learning joint decomposition and synthesis for video relight-ing, 2025. 3 [23] Mingming He, Pascal Clausen, Ahmet Levent Tas ¸el, Li Ma, Oliver Pilarski, Wenqi Xian, Laszlo Rikker, Xueming Yu, Ryan Burgert, Ning Yu, and Paul Debevec. DifFRelight: Diffusion-Based Facial Performance Relighting. In SIG-GRAPH Asia 2024 Conference Papers , New York, NY, USA, 2024. Association for Computing Machinery. 5 [24] Jonathan Ho and Tim Salimans. Classifier-free diffusion guidance. In NeurIPS 2021 Workshop on Deep Generative Models and Downstream Applications , 2021. 5 [25] Jonathan Ho, Ajay Jain, and Pieter Abbeel. Denoising Diffu-sion Probabilistic Models. In Proceedings of the 34th Inter-national Conference on Neural Information Processing Sys-tems , Red Hook, NY, USA, 2020. Curran Associates Inc. 3 [26] Andrew Hou, Michel Sarkis, Ning Bi, Yiying Tong, and Xi-aoming Liu. Face Relighting with Geometrically Consis-tent Shadows . In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR) , pages 4207–4216, Los Alamitos, CA, USA, 2022. IEEE Computer Society. 3 [27] Andrew Hou, Zhixin Shu, Xuaner Zhang, He Zhang, Yan-nick Hold-Geoffroy, Jae Shin Yoon, and Xiaoming Liu. COMPOSE: Comprehensive Portrait Shadow Editing. In 

Computer Vision – ECCV 2024: 18th European Conference, Milan, Italy, September 29–October 4, 2024, Proceedings, Part LXI , page 356–373, Berlin, Heidelberg, 2024. Springer-Verlag. 3 [28] Xun Huang, Zhengqi Li, Guande He, Mingyuan Zhou, and Eli Shechtman. Self forcing: Bridging the train-test gap in autoregressive video diffusion. In Proceedings of the 39th International Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems , 2025. 5 [29] Yingwenqi Jiang, Jiadong Tu, Yuan Liu, Xifeng Gao, Xiaox-iao Long, Wenping Wang, and Yuexin Ma. GaussianShader: 3D Gaussian Splatting with Shading Functions for Reflec-tive Surfaces . In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR) , pages 5322–5332, Los Alamitos, CA, USA, 2024. IEEE Computer Society. 3 [30] Haian Jin, Yuan Li, Fujun Luan, Yuanbo Xiangli, Sai Bi, Kai Zhang, Zexiang Xu, Jin Sun, and Noah Snavely. Neural Gaffer: Relighting Any Object via Diffusion. In Proceedings of the 38th International Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems , 2024. 2, 3, 4, 6 [31] Hoon Kim, Minje Jang, Wonjun Yoon, Jisoo Lee, Donghyun Na, and Sanghyun Woo. SwitchLight: Co-design of Physics-driven Architecture and Pre-training Framework for Human Portrait Relighting. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Confer-ence on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR) ,pages 25096–25106, 2024. 2, 3 [32] Peter Kocsis, Julien Philip, Kalyan Sunkavalli, Matthias Nießner, and Yannick Hold-Geoffroy. LightIt: Illumination modeling and control for diffusion models. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR) , pages 9359–9369, 2024. 3 [33] Ruofan Liang, Zan Gojcic, Huan Ling, Jacob Munkberg, Jon Hasselgren, Zhi-Hao Lin, Jun Gao, Alexander Keller, Nan-dita Vijaykumar, Sanja Fidler, and Zian Wang. Diffusion-Renderer: Neural Inverse and Forward Rendering with Video Diffusion Models. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Confer-ence on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR) ,2025. 2, 3, 6, 5 [34] Yaron Lipman, Ricky T. Q. Chen, Heli Ben-Hamu, Maxim-ilian Nickel, and Matthew Le. Flow matching for generative modeling. In International Conference on Learning Repre-sentations , 2023. 5 [35] Yaron Lipman, Marton Havasi, Peter Holderrieth, Neta Shaul, Matt Le, Brian Karrer, Ricky TQ Chen, David Lopez-Paz, Heli Ben-Hamu, and Itai Gat. Flow matching guide and code. arXiv preprint arXiv:2412.06264 , 2024. 5 [36] Ropeway Liu, Hangjie Yuan, Bo Dong, Jiazheng Xing, Jin-wang Wang, Rui Zhao, Yan Xing, Weihua Chen, and Fan Wang. UniLumos: Fast and Unified Image and Video Re-lighting with Physics-Plausible Feedback. arXiv preprint arXiv:2511.01678 , 2025. 5 [37] Yaojie Liu*, Andrew Hou*, Xinyu Huang, Liu Ren, and Xi-aoming Liu. Blind Removal of Facial Foreign Shadows . In In Proceedings of British Machine Vision Conference (BMVC) , London, UK, 2022. 3 [38] Ilya Loshchilov and Frank Hutter. Decoupled weight de-cay regularization. In International Conference on Learning Representations , 2019. 5 [39] Linjie Lyu, Valentin Deschaintre, Yannick Hold-Geoffroy, Miloˇ s Haˇ san, Jae Shin Yoon, Thomas Leimk¨ uhler, Christian Theobalt, and Iliyan Georgiev. Intrinsicedit: Precise gen-erative image manipulation in intrinsic space. ACM Trans. Graph. , 44(4):1–13, 2025. 3 [40] Weijie Lyu, Yi Zhou, Ming-Hsuan Yang, and Zhixin Shu. Facelift: Learning generalizable single image 3d face re-construction from synthetic heads. In 2025 IEEE/CVF In-ternational Conference on Computer Vision (ICCV) , pages 12691–12701, 2025. 4 [41] Nadav Magar, Amir Hertz, Eric Tabellion, Yael Pritch, Alex Rav-Acha, Ariel Shamir, and Yedid Hoshen. LightLab: Con-trolling Light Sources in Images with Diffusion Models. In Proceedings of the Special Interest Group on Computer Graphics and Interactive Techniques Conference Conference Papers , New York, NY, USA, 2025. Association for Comput-ing Machinery. 3, 8, 4, 19 [42] Yiqun Mei, He Zhang, Xuaner Zhang, Jianming Zhang, Zhixin Shu, Yilin Wang, Zijun Wei, Shi Yan, HyunJoon Jung, and Vishal M. Patel. LightPainter: Interactive Por-trait Relighting with Freehand Scribble . In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR) , pages 195–205, Los Alamitos, CA, USA, 2023. IEEE Computer Society. 3 [43] Yiqun Mei, Mingming He, Li Ma, Julien Philip, Wenqi Xian, David M George, Xueming Yu, Gabriel Dedic, Ahmet Lev-ent Tas ¸el, Ning Yu, Vishal M Patel, and Paul Debevec. Lux Post Facto: Learning Portrait Performance Relighting with Conditional Video Diffusion and a Hybrid Dataset. Proceed-ings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition , 2025. 3 [44] Rohit Pandey, Sergio Orts Escolano, Chloe Legendre, Chris-tian H¨ ane, Sofien Bouaziz, Christoph Rhemann, Paul De-bevec, and Sean Fanello. Total relighting: learning to relight portraits for background replacement. ACM Trans. Graph. ,40(4), 2021. 2, 3 [45] William Peebles and Saining Xie. Scalable Diffusion Models with Transformers. In 2023 IEEE/CVF International Confer-ence on Computer Vision (ICCV) , pages 4195–4205, 2023. 3, 5[46] Matt Pharr, Wenzel Jakob, and Greg Humphreys. Physi-cally based rendering: From theory to implementation . MIT Press, 2023. 1 [47] Poly Haven Contributors. Poly haven. https : / / polyhaven.com/ , 2021. Free public asset library for 3D artists. 4 [48] Puntawat Ponglertnapakorn, Nontawat Tritrong, and Supa-sorn Suwajanakorn. DiFaReli: Diffusion face relighting. In 

2023 IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer Vi-sion (ICCV) , pages 22589–22600, 2023. 2, 3 [49] Erik Reinhard, Michael Stark, Peter Shirley, and James Fer-werda. Photographic tone reproduction for digital images. In Proceedings of the 29th Annual Conference on Computer Graphics and Interactive Techniques , page 267–276, New York, NY, USA, 2002. Association for Computing Machin-ery. 4, 1, 3 [50] Mengwei Ren, Wei Xiong, Jae Shin Yoon, Zhixin Shu, Jian-ming Zhang, HyunJoon Jung, Guido Gerig, and He Zhang. Relightful Harmonization: Lighting-Aware Portrait Back-ground Replacement. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR) , pages 6452–6462, 2024. 2, 3 [51] Peiran Ren, Yue Dong, Stephen Lin, Xin Tong, and Baining Guo. Image based relighting using neural networks. ACM Trans. Graph. , 34(4), 2015. 3 [52] Robin Rombach, Andreas Blattmann, Dominik Lorenz, Patrick Esser, and Bj¨ orn Ommer. High-Resolution Image Synthesis with Latent Diffusion Models. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR) , pages 10674–10685, 2022. 3, 5 [53] Chitwan Saharia, William Chan, Huiwen Chang, Chris Lee, Jonathan Ho, Tim Salimans, David Fleet, and Mohammad Norouzi. Palette: Image-to-Image Diffusion Models. In 

ACM SIGGRAPH 2022 Conference Proceedings , New York, NY, USA, 2022. Association for Computing Machinery. 3 [54] Chris Schoeneman, Julie Dorsey, Brian Smits, James Arvo, and Donald Greenberg. Painting with light. In Proceedings of the 20th Annual Conference on Computer Graphics and Interactive Techniques , page 143–146, New York, NY, USA, 1993. Association for Computing Machinery. 3 [55] Zhixin Shu, Sunil Hadap, Eli Shechtman, Kalyan Sunkavalli, Sylvain Paris, and Dimitris Samaras. Portrait lighting trans-fer using a mass transport approach. ACM Trans. Graph. , 37 (2), 2017. 3 [56] Jiaming Song, Chenlin Meng, and Stefano Ermon. Denois-ing diffusion implicit models. In International Conference on Learning Representations , 2021. 5 [57] Yang Song, Prafulla Dhariwal, Mark Chen, and Ilya Sutskever. Consistency models. In Proceedings of the 40th International Conference on Machine Learning . JMLR.org, 2023. 3 [58] Jianlin Su, Murtadha Ahmed, Yu Lu, Shengfeng Pan, Wen Bo, and Yunfeng Liu. RoFormer: Enhanced transformer with Rotary Position Embedding. Neurocomput. , 568(C), 2024. 5 [59] Matthew Tancik, Pratul P. Srinivasan, Ben Mildenhall, Sara Fridovich-Keil, Nithin Raghavan, Utkarsh Singhal, Ravi Ra-mamoorthi, Jonathan T. Barron, and Ren Ng. Fourier Fea-tures Let Networks Learn High Frequency Functions in Low Dimensional Domains. NeurIPS , 2020. 5 [60] Ashish Vaswani, Noam Shazeer, Niki Parmar, Jakob Uszko-reit, Llion Jones, Aidan N. Gomez, Łukasz Kaiser, and Il-lia Polosukhin. Attention is all you need. In Proceedings of the 31st International Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems , page 6000–6010, Red Hook, NY, USA, 2017. Curran Associates Inc. 5 [61] Team Wan, Ang Wang, Baole Ai, Bin Wen, Chaojie Mao, Chen-Wei Xie, Di Chen, Feiwu Yu, Haiming Zhao, Jianx-iao Yang, Jianyuan Zeng, Jiayu Wang, Jingfeng Zhang, Jin-gren Zhou, Jinkai Wang, Jixuan Chen, Kai Zhu, Kang Zhao, Keyu Yan, Lianghua Huang, Mengyang Feng, Ningyi Zhang, Pandeng Li, Pingyu Wu, Ruihang Chu, Ruili Feng, Shiwei Zhang, Siyang Sun, Tao Fang, Tianxing Wang, Tianyi Gui, Tingyu Weng, Tong Shen, Wei Lin, Wei Wang, Wei Wang, Wenmeng Zhou, Wente Wang, Wenting Shen, Wenyuan Yu, Xianzhong Shi, Xiaoming Huang, Xin Xu, Yan Kou, Yangyu Lv, Yifei Li, Yijing Liu, Yiming Wang, Yingya Zhang, Yi-tong Huang, Yong Li, You Wu, Yu Liu, Yulin Pan, Yun Zheng, Yuntao Hong, Yupeng Shi, Yutong Feng, Zeyinzi Jiang, Zhen Han, Zhi-Fan Wu, and Ziyu Liu. Wan: Open and Advanced Large-Scale Video Generative Models, 2025. 5[62] Guangcong Wang, Yinuo Yang, Chen Change Loy, and Zi-wei Liu. Stylelight: Hdr panorama generation for lighting estimation and editing. In Computer Vision – ECCV 2022: 17th European Conference, Tel Aviv, Israel, October 23–27, 2022, Proceedings, Part XV , page 477–492, Berlin, Heidel-berg, 2022. Springer-Verlag. 3 [63] Junying Wang, Jingyuan Liu, Xin Sun, Krishna Kumar Singh, Zhixin Shu, He Zhang, Jimei Yang, Nanxuan Zhao, Tuanfeng Y. Wang, Simon S. Chen, Ulrich Neumann, and Jae Shin Yoon. Comprehensive Relighting: Generalizable and Consistent Monocular Human Relighting and Harmo-nization . In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR) , pages 380–390, Los Alamitos, CA, USA, 2025. IEEE Computer Society. 3 [64] Erroll Wood, Tadas Baltruˇ saitis, Charlie Hewitt, Sebastian Dziadzio, Thomas J. Cashman, and Jamie Shotton. Fake it till you make it: face analysis in the wild using synthetic data alone. In 2021 IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer Vision (ICCV) , pages 3661–3671, 2021. 4 [65] Xiaoyan Xing, Konrad Groh, Sezer Karaoglu, Theo Gevers, and Anand Bhattad. LumiNet: Latent Intrinsics Meets Dif-fusion Models for Indoor Scene Relighting . In Proceed-ings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR) , pages 442–452, Los Alamitos, CA, USA, 2025. IEEE Computer Society. 3 [66] Zexiang Xu, Kalyan Sunkavalli, Sunil Hadap, and Ravi Ramamoorthi. Deep image-based relighting from optimal sparse samples. ACM Trans. Graph. , 37(4):1–13, 2018. 3 [67] Renjiao Yi, Chenyang Zhu, and Kai Xu. Weakly-supervised Single-view Image Relighting . In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR) , pages 8402–8411, Los Alamitos, CA, USA, 2023. IEEE Computer Society. 3 [68] Tianwei Yin, Michael Gharbi, Richard Zhang, Eli Shecht-man, Fredo Durand, William T. Freeman, and Taesung Park. One-Step Diffusion with Distribution Matching Distillation . In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR) , pages 6613–6623, Los Alamitos, CA, USA, 2024. IEEE Computer Society. 3 [69] Tianwei Yin, Qiang Zhang, Richard Zhang, William T. Free-man, Fredo Durand, Eli Shechtman, and Xun Huang. From Slow Bidirectional to Fast Autoregressive Video Diffusion Models . In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR) , pages 22963–22974, Los Alamitos, CA, USA, 2025. IEEE Com-puter Society. 5 [70] Jae Shin Yoon, Zhixin Shu, Mengwei Ren, Cecilia Zhang, Yannick Hold-Geoffroy, Krishna kumar Singh, and He Zhang. Generative Portrait Shadow Removal. ACM Trans. Graph. , 43(6), 2024. 3 [71] Chong Zeng, Yue Dong, Pieter Peers, Youkang Kong, Hongzhi Wu, and Xin Tong. DiLightNet: Fine-grained Lighting Control for Diffusion-based Image Generation. In 

ACM SIGGRAPH 2024 Conference Papers , New York, NY, USA, 2024. Association for Computing Machinery. 2, 3 [72] Zheng Zeng, Valentin Deschaintre, Iliyan Georgiev, Yannick Hold-Geoffroy, Yiwei Hu, Fujun Luan, Ling-Qi Yan, and Miloˇ s Haˇ san. RGB ↔X: Image decomposition and synthe-sis using material- and lighting-aware diffusion models. In 

ACM SIGGRAPH 2024 Conference Papers , New York, NY, USA, 2024. Association for Computing Machinery. 3 [73] Lvmin Zhang, Anyi Rao, and Maneesh Agrawala. Scaling In-the-Wild Training for Diffusion-based Illumination Har-monization and Editing by Imposing Consistent Light Trans-port. In International Conference on Learning Representa-tions , 2025. 2, 3 [74] Richard Zhang, Phillip Isola, Alexei A. Efros, Eli Shecht-man, and Oliver Wang. The unreasonable effectiveness of deep features as a perceptual metric. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR) , pages 586–595, 2018. 6 [75] Tianyuan Zhang, Zhengfei Kuang, Haian Jin, Zexiang Xu, Sai Bi, Hao Tan, He Zhang, Yiwei Hu, Milos Hasan, William T. Freeman, Kai Zhang, and Fujun Luan. Re-litLRM: Generative relightable radiance for large reconstruc-tion models. In International Conference on Learning Rep-resentations , 2025. 2 [76] Xuaner (Cecilia) Zhang, Jonathan T. Barron, Yun-Ta Tsai, Rohit Pandey, Xiuming Zhang, Ren Ng, and David E. Ja-cobs. Portrait shadow manipulation. ACM Trans. Graph. , 39 (4), 2020. 3 [77] Zitian Zhang, Fr´ ed´ eric Fortier-Chouinard, Mathieu Garon, Anand Bhattad, and Jean-Franc ¸ois Lalonde. Zerocomp: Zero-shot object compositing from image intrinsics via dif-fusion. In 2025 IEEE/CVF Winter Conference on Applica-tions of Computer Vision (WACV) , pages 483–494. IEEE, 2025. 3 [78] Yanli Zhao, Andrew Gu, Rohan Varma, Liang Luo, Chien-Chin Huang, Min Xu, Less Wright, Hamid Shojanazeri, Myle Ott, Sam Shleifer, Alban Desmaison, Can Balioglu, Pritam Damania, Bernard Nguyen, Geeta Chauhan, Yuchen Hao, Ajit Mathews, and Shen Li. PyTorch FSDP: Experi-ences on Scaling Fully Sharded Data Parallel. Proc. VLDB Endow. , 16(12):3848–3860, 2023. 5 TokenLight : Precise Lighting Control in Images using Attribute Tokens 

# Supplementary Material 

In the supplementary, we provide additional implemen-tation details, analysis, qualitative results, and comparisons with baseline methods. Please refer to the supplementary video for a visual overview and further qualitative results. 

## A. Experimental Setting 

A.1. Synthetic Evaluation 

Here we provide additional details on synthetic evaluation. This complements our description in the main paper in Sec. 4.1. For the synthetic benchmark, we compare against two ground-truth targets: PointGT, rendered with the original point light, and PanoGT, rendered using an environment-map representation of that light, for fairness in our com-parison with environment-map–based baselines. Here we describe how PanoGT is constructed. To create the environment map, we replace the point light with an emissive sphere of radius r centered at the original light position. The sphere is assigned a uniform emission L such that its total emitted energy matches the point light [46]: 

L = E

4π2r2 . (3) A panoramic camera is then placed at the center of the object to render the environment map, which serves as the lighting input for environment-map baselines. Render-ing the object under this map produces the PanoGT target. The panoramic camera captures the incident radiance field 

L(x, ω) at location x ∈ R3, where ω denotes directions on the unit sphere. This provides an approximation to render-ing with a 3D point light, as it assumes L(x, ω) is constant across all surface points in the scene. When the scene is lit by a distant point light, L(x, ω) varies slowly as x changes, making this approximation valid. However, the approxi-mation degrades as the point light becomes more local to the scene, where L(x, ω) exhibits stronger spatial varia-tion. This represents the limitation of using environment map to model spatially varying lighting, and consequently why PanoGT and PointGT exhibit small but non-zero dif-ferences, as seen in Tab. 1, last row. 

A.2. VisibleFixture-60 Capture Protocol 

We capture a dataset of indoor office scenes to evaluate our ability to manipulate lighting from visible light fixtures. We capture a scene with controlled illumination changes by turning the visible light fixture on/off. All captures are performed in office spaces using an iPhone mounted on a tripod, with a fixed camera pose across all shots. We use iPhone’s ProRAW mode with auto-exposure enabled. Since the camera remains fixed, no image registration or align-ment is required. The captured ProRAW images are 4K/8K Digital Nega-tive (DNG) images and are converted to EXR format subse-quently tone-mapped using the Reinhard operator [49]. For each scene, we manually segment visible light fixtures to identify controllable sources. 

## B. Additional Implementation Details 

Paired Supervision Synthesis Here we provide addi-tional details on synthesizing training pairs, complementing the description in the main paper in Sec. 3.1. To support intensity, color, spatial, and diffuse controls, we generate supervision on-the-fly during data loading by combining an ambient render I, an on-light render O, and a tone-mapping operator T(·).

Visible-Light fixtures For visible fixtures, we construct the ambient image by adding the environment-map render with contributions from up to five non-selected fixtures. We then choose one fixture to act as the controllable source, use its corresponding render as O, and combine them as 

Ir = T a I + λ c O, (4) where a is the ambient scale, λ the intensity (both in 

[0 , 1] ), and c the sampled color. This setup ensures that only the selected fixture contributes the controllable light, while all remaining illumination is interpreted as ambient, cleanly separating the masked light’s effect from the surrounding lighting. 

Spatial lighting. For spatial lighting, we follow a par-allel construction. The ambient image I is given by the environment-map render, while the controllable source is a point light with a sampled 3D position. The render O cor-responds to this single point light, and we again form the relit image as 

Ir = T a I + λ c O. (5) This formulation provides supervision for precise spatial control: the model learns how a point light at a known 3D location influences the scene. Cam 1 Cam 2  

> Light 1
> Light 2
> Scene 1 Scene 2

Render 1 Render 2 Figure 10. An illustration of the scene-agnostic camera and lighting parameterization, implemented via a transformation from a canonical reference space. Scene 2 is a similarity-transformed version of Scene 1. We map Cam 1 → Cam 2 and Light 1 → Light 2 using the scene transformation defined in our paper. Rendering Scene 1 with Cam 1 produces Render 1, and rendering Scene 2 with Cam 2 produces Render 2, which is visually indistinguishable from Render 1 (only one scene is rendered at a time). This construction allows cameras and lights to be defined in a canonical reference space while scenes are freely placed at different locations, scales, and orientations, ensuring a consistent relationship between lighting parameters and their visual effects in the image space. 

Global diffuse-level control For diffuse-spread supervi-sion, we fix the light position and render multiple spread levels. Let A denote the ambient render, O1 and O2 the on-light renders with different spread parameters, and I and 

Ir the corresponding tone-mapped input and target images. Training pairs hold intensity, color, and location constant while varying only the spread parameter: 

I = T ac1 A + λ c2 O1

,Ir = T ac1 A + λ c2 O2

. (6) The difference in spread between O1 and O2, dg conditions the model. Note that in order to ensure that perceived dif-ferences in shadow softness only stem from O1 and O2 we use constant ambient lighting for A, avoiding environment map renders as they can introduce strong directional shad-ows (e.g., from sunlight) that would appear in both I and Ir ,breaking the intended spread-only supervision, since such fixed shadows would confound the effect of changing only the diffuse-spread parameter. In all three cases, the network predicts Ir , given I and lighting-edit attributes. 

Scene-Agnostic Camera and Lighting Here, we provide additional details for our implementation of scene-agnostic camera and lighting that complement the description in the main paper in Sec. 3.2. We define a canonical reference space containing a cam-era at position pcam and a light sampling volume centered at C. Light parameters, 3D position plight , energy E, and radius d, are drawn from this space. The cube extends both in front of and behind the image plane, enabling the sam-pling of lights that fall partially or fully outside the visible frame. All renders use a fixed field of view of 39 .6◦ across our synthetic scenes. During testing, the field of view (FOV) of the input im-ages is unknown. We find that the effectiveness of 3D po-sition controls is not affected, due to the use of normalized coordinates in the reference space. To expose the model to viewpoint variability while pre-serving the meaning of the canonical coordinates, we ap-ply 3D similarity transformations to both the lights and the camera during data generation. Given a target cube center Ct and scale factor s, we first apply a translation that moves both pcam and plight from the canonical center C to Ct:

pt = p + ( Ct − C). (7) We then apply a uniform scaling about the new center: 

pts = Ct + s (pt − Ct). (8) Scaling also adjusts appearance-dependent parameters. The light energy becomes 

Es = s2E,  (9) which preserves perceived brightness by compensating for inverse-square falloff, and the radius becomes 

ds = sd,  (10) which maintains the angular extent of the light as viewed from the camera. Together, these adjustments ensure that the apparent lighting behavior is invariant under uniform rescaling of the scene. We optionally apply a rotation R ∈ SO (3) about Ct:

ptsr = Ct + R(pts − Ct). (11) This allows the model to observe the same canonical con-figuration under diverse orientations while preserving the geometry of camera–light relationships. In practice, rendering uses the fully transformed param-eters (ptsr, cam , ptsr, light , E s, d s), while the model is con-ditioned only on the canonical (pre-transform) parameters 

(plight , d ), which are the values provided by users at infer-ence. This separation ensures that tokenized 3D coordi-nates correspond to a consistent spatial meaning irrespec-tive of the underlying scene content or the particular simi-larity transform applied during training. We provide a visualization in Fig. 10 to illustrate how the scene transformation operates. The figure shows two scenes, each containing a camera and a point light, related by a similarity transform. We render both scenes after trans-forming the light attributes and camera locations under our formulation. The resulting images are visually indistin-guishable, confirming that our parameterization preserves lighting behavior under arbitrary scene placement. This en-ables all lighting parameters to be defined once in a canoni-cal space and ensures that lighting parameters produce con-sistent visual effects in image space as scenes are placed freely at different locations, scales and orientations. 

Additional Training Details We use a 2B-parameter dif-fusion transformer. Each 960 px image is encoded into a la-tent of shape  [12 , 120 , 120] , patchified  2 × 2 to  [48 , 60 , 60] ,projected to 4096-dimensional tokens, and flattened into a 3600-token sequence. Training runs on two nodes (each with 8 ×A100 80GB) with a total batch size of 160, split as 64:48:48 across visible-light, spatial, and diffuse cases. To enable classifier-free guidance at inference, we drop light-ing edit ∆L tokens 10% of the times, replacing them with a tensor of matching sequence length and dimensionality with values -1. 

## C. Additional User Study Details  

> Figure 11. User Study Questionnaire.

Here, we provide additional details for the user study summarized in Tab. 2 of the main paper. In the absence of ground-truth lighting, quantitative evaluation on in-the-wild images is challenging. We therefore conduct a user study comparing TokenLight against the closest spatial-control baselines, GenLit [3] and Careaga et al. [8]. As shown in Fig. 11, each trial presents an input image, a target-lighting reference, and two relit outputs. Users select the output that better matches the target lighting; if both match the target similarly well, they break ties by choosing the one with fewer artifacts. In the example shown in Fig. 11, the input is a metallic frog figurine, and the target-lighting reference is a Suzanne render lit from above. This reference serves as a visual guide for the lighting cues users should attend to, such as shadow direction and the placement of bright regions. In this example, Output A better matches the in-tended top-down lighting than Output B and exhibits fewer artifacts. Using 20 in-the-wild images and 5 target lights, we collect votes from 18 users for each baseline compari-son. We apply Reinhard auto-exposure [49] to all outputs to reduce perceived brightness as a confounding factor. 

## D. Effect of Inference steps on Quality/Speed 

We evaluate the effect of the number of sampling steps on relighting quality in Fig. 12. We report results using 1, 5, 10, 20, and 50 steps on the synthetic evaluation set described in Sec. 4.1. Each step requires two number-of-function-evaluations (NFE) due to classifier-free guidance. Timing is measured on a single A100 80GB GPU and re-flects end-to-end inference time, including pre- and post-processing. Both LPIPS and SSIM improve with more sampling steps, while PSNR exhibits minor fluctuations but follows an overall upward trend. Qualitatively, plausible lighting emerges even at very few steps, though with visible arti-facts (e.g., residual noise patterns at 1 step in Fig. 12(ii), and overly smooth appearance of the pumpkin at low step counts in Fig. 12(iii)) that diminish as the step count in-creases. This suggests that distillation techniques [57, 68] may be a promising direction for accelerating inference in future work. 

## E. Additional Qualitative Results 

Additional spatial lighting results Fig. 13 presents ad-ditional examples of inserting virtual lights at different 3D locations, with emphasis on portrait relighting appli-cations. Our method produces high-quality results that preserve subject identity while robustly handling complex light–geometry interactions. 

Spatial lighting under extreme viewpoints Fig. 14 shows results on images captured from top-down camera viewpoints. These viewpoints are not explicitly seen dur-ing training. We evaluate two virtual light trajectories: (a) left-to-right and (b) bottom-to-top, while the light is placed above the objects in both cases. Despite this challenging configuration, our method produces consistent shading and shadows. We attribute this behavior to our camera-agnostic lighting representation and the heavy augmentation of cam-era viewpoints during training, where we randomize the camera pitch in the range [−30 ◦, 0◦].

Additional comparisons with Careaga et al. Fig. 15 provides further qualitative comparisons under additional lighting directions. Our method maintains consistent ed-its across diverse scenes, while Careaga et al. occasionally introduce unintended appearance changes—such as albedo shifts—likely stemming from intrinsic decomposition er-rors in their pipeline. 

Additional comparisons with GenLit Fig. 16 shows fur-ther examples comparing our approach with GenLit. Across these cases, our method has stable light placement and co-herent shading, whereas GenLit’s outputs often exhibit drift in the intended light position and less consistent illumina-tion effects. 

Ambient Lighting Control We provide additional qualitative results demonstrating the range of ambi-ent–illumination edits supported by our model. Fig. 17 shows continuous scaling of ambient intensity on a variety of examples where a mask is used to spec-ify the light source to be preserved while the remaining light sources, considered ambient lighting, are gradually dimmed. Additionally, we demonstrate control over shadow soft-ness using the diffuse spread parameter dg . In Fig. 18, pos-itive values of dg increase shadow softness by diffusing the light. Since our model is conditioned on the difference in spread parameters, dg can also be negative. As shown in Fig. 19, negative dg values reverse the light diffusion pro-cess, progressively sharpening shadows in the input image. 

Visible-Light Fixture Intensity Control In Fig. 20 and Fig. 21, we demonstrate fine-grained control over visible light-fixture intensities. In Fig. 20, given an input image and a mask that local-izes the visible light source, our method gradually dims the fixture, handling diverse cases including chandeliers. In Fig. 21, we show the reverse process, where an ini-tially off light is progressively turned on. As intensity in-creases, the illumination spread follows the geometry of the emitter i.e., the lamp shades and produces plausible, direc-tionally consistent shadows throughout the scene. 

Outdoor Visible-Light Fixture Results Fig. 22 shows examples of localized light editing in outdoor scenes. In these results, turning off a car’s headlight suppresses only the light emitted by the fixture, while the surrounding illu-mination from the environment (e.g., sunlight) remains un-changed. Although our method is not explicitly trained on outdoor scenes, our synthetic dataset contains only indoor ones, we render training samples under a variety of envi-ronment maps, including outdoor HDRIs. Exposure to such lighting conditions may help the model distinguish local-ized visible light sources from global environment illumi-nation, enabling plausible behavior in these outdoor exam-ples. 

Additional results on VisibleFixture-60 Fig. 23 shows additional results from our VisibleFixture-60 test set, which provides paired captures with visible light sources toggled on and off. Our method turns lights on with illumination that closely matches the reference (row (i)), handles com-plex disjoint masks involving multiple fixtures (row (ii)), and produces shadows consistent with the captured scene (rows (ii–iii)). Rows (iv–v) show the reverse case: when lights are turned off, associated effects such as shadows (row (iv)) and reflections in the glass pane (row (v)) cor-rectly disappear. 

Qualitative comparisons with LightLab LightLab [41] focuses on toggling visible light sources in real indoor scenes. Using author provided test-cases, we perform qual-itative comparisons in Fig. 25. Our method reproduces fine-grained effects such as mug shadows and scene reflections (i), and turns lights off while retaining realistic ambient lighting (ii). 

## F. Independent control of multiple lights 

Our representation extends trivially to multiple lights by re-peating a compact per-light token block (p, c, λ, d ). Each block parameterizes a single light via its 3D position p,color c, intensity λ, and diffuse level d. We train a model variant supporting up to three lights. During training, we sample k ∈ { 1, 2, 3} active lights. For inactive lights, we set their parameters to −1.Extending the single-light formulation in Sec. 3.1, we construct supervision by summing the contributions of indi-vidual lights. Let Oi denote the render corresponding to the 

i-th light at position pi with sampled parameters (ci, λ i),and let I denote the ambient render. The relit image is given by 

Ir = T a I +

> k

X

> i=1

λi ci Oi

!

, (12) where a ∈ [0 , 1] is the ambient scale and T(·) is the tone-mapping operator. This construction mirrors the single-light case, with the controllable illumination formed by summing per-light contributions. Since our lighting representation is compact, repeating the per-light token block results in only a modest increase in sequence length; for up to three lights, this incurs negligible additional training and inference cost. Fig. 26 shows qualitative results with two and three lights. The model produces consistent shading and shad-ows, with independent light control Fig. 26a and plausible color mixing along shadow boundaries Fig. 26b. 

## G. Discussion on Video Relighting 

Video relighting is a natural extension of our work, reflected by the recent surge of interest [16, 33, 36]. However, ex-tending our lighting representation to video raises interest-ing research questions, which we discuss here with a focus on spatial lighting control. The main challenge arises from the fact that the opera-tional space of our spatial lighting representation (i.e., the 3D coordinates exposed to the user) is defined relative to the camera rather than in a canonical 3D world space, rais-ing questions about light placement and persistence as ob-jects/camera move within the video. In the simplest setting, without a driving video, with the goal of animating a relit image, an image-to-video model [61] may be used to prop-agate lighting edits. Similarly, in settings with a driving video but limited object motion and a static camera (e.g., facial performance capture [23]), our camera-agnostic light-ing representation may already be sufficient, provided the model is trained on paired relighting data with the appropri-ate motion characteristics. In the general case, where both camera and scene ob-jects move, it remains unclear how a lighting edit specified in the first frame should persist over time. This raises an open question in how to formulate the learning problem— whether via explicit pose tracking, per-frame light tokens, or implicit inference from video. We view this as an inter-esting direction for future work. Finally, future work can address autoregressive genera-tion for faster response times. Recent advances [28, 69] in efficient autoregressive video generation suggest a plausible route toward interactive video relighting. 

## H. Limitations 

While our tokenized representation enables intuitive con-trol, several limitations remain. First, our method relies on a large DiT architecture, making real-time interaction for ap-plications requiring immediate feedback currently challeng-ing. Second, the diffusion-based formulation introduces sampling stochasticity—different random seeds produce vi-sually similar but non-identical results (Fig. 24)—most visi-ble at the low-diffuse settings with sharper shadows—which may be problematic for workflows requiring deterministic outputs. Finally, our method generalizes better to indoor scenes than outdoor environments, reflecting a training data bias: our dataset contains no outdoor synthetic scenes. Fu-ture work could address these limitations through model distillation for faster inference and training with more di-verse outdoor data. Quantitative evaluation of relighting quality versus sampling steps and inference time.          

> Sampling Steps = 1Sampling Steps = 5Sampling Steps = 10Sampling Steps = 20Sampling Steps = 50
> (i)
> (ii)
> (iii)

Figure 12. Effect of sampling steps on relighting quality. Quantitative evaluation of PSNR, SSIM, LPIPS versus sampling steps and inference time (top). In-the-wild qualitative results at varying step counts for inputs from Fig. 8 rows (i), (iii) and Fig. 9 (i). (bottom). Figure 13. Spatial lighting for portraits : For each input, we show three relit outputs with lights inserted at different 3D locations. The results demonstrate high-quality portrait relighting and complex light–geometry interactions, including challenging cases such as the veiled subject. (i) Light trajectories (ii) Top-down input view (iii) Light moving horizontally (green border) and vertically (blue border) Figure 14. Extreme camera viewpoints. We test on top-down views (left) moving the point light along two trajectories (top). The model follows both motions, left → right (green border) and down → up (blue border), with coherent shading and shadows. Input Careaga et al . [8] Careaga et al . [8] Ours Ours  

> Top Lit Left Lit

Figure 15. Additional comparison with Careaga et al. [8] We show the input image and results for two lighting directions (top-lit and left-lit). In the first row, our method produces plausible relighting on fur. In the second row, it better preserves the material appearance of the input. In the last row, it relights the building while maintaining its albedo. Input GenLit [3] GenLit [3] Ours Ours        

> Input GenLit [3] GenLit [3] Ours Ours
> Top Lit Left Lit
> Center Lit Right Lit

Figure 16. Additional comparison with GenLit [3] Across these additional examples, our method produces more consistent light placement, while GenLit often exhibits drift in the intended light position. Input Mask Ambient = 0.75 Ambient = 0.5 Ambient = 0.25 Ambient = 0.0 Figure 17. Continuous ambient–intensity control. Each row shows an input image and its light-fixture mask. All remaining illumination is treated as ambient and is progressively reduced by our method. In the first row, for instance, the ambient light from the window fades while the masked light source’s reflection in the glass remains unchanged, illustrating proper separation of ambient and the masked light-fixture. Input Global Diffuse = 0.33 Global Diffuse = 0.66 Global Diffuse = 1.00 Figure 18. Ambient-light diffusion for shadow softness . In each row, we show an input and three results with increasing global diffuse levels that increase shadow softness. Input Global Diffuse = -0.33 Global Diffuse = -0.66 Global Diffuse = -1.00 Figure 19. Ambient-light diffusion for shadow sharpening . In each row, we show an input and three results with different global diffuse levels. By providing negative dg values, we can adjust the ambient light diffuse level to make shadows sharper. Input Mask Intensity = 0.75 Intensity = 0.5 Intensity = 0.25 Intensity = 0.0 Figure 20. Light-intensity control to gradually turn off lights . Our method gradually turns off light in input images, provided a mask and different intensity levels, even generalizing to complicated light fixtures such as chandeliers, different types of lamps and streetlights. In the last two rows we show how the mask can be used to localize lighting edits, turning off street lights one at a time. Input Mask Intensity = 0.25 Intensity = 0.5 Intensity = 0.75 Intensity = 1.0 Figure 21. Light-intensity control for turning lights on : Given a light-visibility mask, our method increases intensity with realistic light falloffs, i.e., the illuminated portions on nearby walls retain plausible boundary based on light-fixture shape. Input Mask Output Figure 22. Outdoor light disentanglement. Turning off a car’s backlight suppresses only the light, without darkening the environment. Our pipeline renders localized light edits under diverse environment maps, promoting this separation. Figure 23. We present additional results on our VisibleFixture-60 test set with available ground truth. Rows (i-iii) show examples where our method turns lights on while rows (iv-v) show examples where our method turns lights off. Diffuse Level = 0.00 

> Diffuse Level = 0.33
> Diffuse Level = 0.66
> Results with 3 different inference seeds

Figure 24. Seed-dependent variation across diffuse levels. We insert a virtual light at the same 3D location and vary its diffuse level across the three rows (low to high). Each row shows three outputs generated with different inference seeds. At low diffuse levels, shadows become sharper and exhibit minor seed-dependent shifts. As the diffuse level increases, results become naturally more consistent across seeds. All outputs remain plausible and preserve the intended lighting edit, illustrating that seed-dependent variation is limited to subtle differences. Input LightLab [41] Ours 

> (i)
> (ii)

Figure 25. Comparison with LightLab [41]: Using results provided by the authors, we qualitatively compare our method—reproducing photorealistic effects such as mug shadows and light reflecting from tabletop in (i), and the lamp turning off in (ii). (i) Input  

> (ii) Light trajectories (iii) Outputs with one light moving others fixed

(a) Independent multi-light control . We show the input (top left), the 3D trajectories of three light sources (bottom left), and relighting results obtained by sweeping one light while keeping the other two fixed (right): Top row shows red light moving from bottom to top, middle row shows green light moving from center to right and bottom row shows blue light moving from front to back. (i) Input (ii) Insert two colored lights at fixed locations; regions illuminated by both exhibit additive color mixing. 

(b) Color mixing under multiple lights . We show the input (left) and relit outputs (right) under two fixed light sources placed at the top-left and top-right of the scene. The model produces plausible color mixing and colored shadows, following expected additive behavior across both primary (first three examples) and complementary color combinations (i.e., red + cyan = white). 

Figure 26. Our compact light representation can easily be extended to support simultaneous editing of multiple light sources with different attributes (location, intensity, color, diffuse level) within a single inference pass.