Title: Filtering-out poor-quality images for data preparation

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2607.12352v1

Published Time: Wed, 15 Jul 2026 12:00:44 GMT

Number of Pages: 11

Markdown Content:
> 1

# Filtering-out poor-quality images for data preparation 

Roopdeep Kaur, Gour Karmakar, and Muhammad Imran 

Abstract —Filtering noise is a fundamental part of data prepa-ration that enhances image quality for applications such as object segmentation, detection, and recognition. Various noise reduction techniques are proposed in the literature, including the use of median, Gaussian, and bilateral filters. Convolutional neural networks (CNNs) have gained popularity in image denoising owing to their ability to extract complex patterns and features from data. CNNs are highly adaptable, making them effective tools for various image-denoising tasks. One drawback of CNN-based techniques is that they require an appropriate training dataset and all images to be resized. Another notable drawback of all these filtering techniques is that they work for certain types of environmental and camera noises. To bridge this research gap, in this paper, for the first time, instead of denoising, we propose an approach that filters out poor-quality images for various environmental and camera impacts. In our approach, quality is assessed using an image quality assessment metric and an optimum threshold is used to filter out poor-quality images. We also ensure that a sufficient number of images remain to develop the deep learning (DL) model. The results produced using real and simulated traffic and object recognition data demonstrate the performance supremacy of the proposed approach compared with the state-of-the-art approaches. The average recognition accuracy for our proposed approach is 93.8% for the traffic sign recognition dataset and 84.9% for the object recognition dataset. This indicates our model’s potential for real-life applications such as autonomous vehicles. 

Index Terms —SSIM, image filtering, environmental impacts, camera impacts, convolutional neural networks. 

I. I NTRODUCTION 

A digital image has significance in many fields such as smart health, smart agriculture, smart cities, wildlife conservation, surveillance and security, and industry [1]. For example, smart agriculture applications may employ an Internet of Things (IoT) camera for capturing images to monitor crop health, de-tect pests, assess soil moisture, and manage irrigation systems. Farmers can use these images to make informed decisions about crop management, resulting in higher productivity and a reduction in resource consumption [2]. However, the literature demonstrates that several environ-mental and camera distortion impacts lead to poor-quality image acquisition, which negatively affects the application performance because image-processing applications struggle to recognize or detect objects (e.g., traffic signs, pedestrians, vehicles) in those poor-quality images. Environmental impacts include snow, shadow (SH), rain, and darkness (DK), while lens blur and lens dirtiness are examples of camera impacts [3].  

> R. Kaur, G. Karmakar and M. Imran are with the Institute of Innovation, Science and Sustainability, Federation University Australia e-mail: (roopdeep-kaur@students.federation.edu.au, gour.karmakar@federation.edu.au, m.imran@federation.edu.au).

For this, many image-denoising approaches [4], [5], [6] have been proposed to remove noise while maintaining the quality of the image details, such as edges and sharpness. Image de-noising is accomplished using a variety of standard filters such as Gaussian, median, Wiener filters [7]. In real-world noisy images, however, these methods have some limitations and are not effective for other regular noise types that have not been specifically targeted as well as irregular noises. Therefore, to address this problem, there are many deep learning (DL)-based approaches employed for image denoising. The most prominent approaches are ResNet [8] U-Net [9], and DenseNet [10]. However, the main limitation of these approaches is that they are suitable for a particular noise and do not work well for all types of noises. In addition, all of these approaches require training sets and resized images, which results in important information being lost. Hence, tackling denoising issues still poses a challenge for researchers [11]. To reduce the impact of environmental and camera noises on images, existing approaches employ mainly filtering techniques. However, the literature has demonstrated that the filtering approach has limited efficacy. This creates a compelling case for introducing an approach that can directly filter out poor-quality images from training and test datasets. This paper introduces an approach to filtering out poor-quality images affected by different types of environmental and camera distortion impacts. Our major contributions are as follows: 1) For the first time, we propose a generic conceptual approach based on convolutional neural network (CNN) to filter out poor-quality images for data preparation so that the selected image dataset can be utilized by various applications. We employ an assessment metric to calculate the quality of the images and then filter out those images in which the quality is less than the threshold. The optimum value of the threshold is selected by maximizing the recognition accuracy of the validation set and ensuring sufficient images remain for training. 2) We compare our proposed approach with state-of-the-art approaches. We use two datasets, Challenging Unreal and Real Environments for Traffic Sign Recognition (CURE-TSR) [12] and Challenging Unreal and Real Environments for Object Recognition (CURE-OR) [13], to calculate the traffic and object recognition accuracy. The average accuracy of our proposed approach is 93.8% for CURE-TSR and 84.9% for CURE-OR datasets, re-spectively, which is considerably different from the best-performing existing state-of-the-art approaches (77.4% arXiv:2607.12352v1 [cs.CV] 14 Jul 2026 2

for Embedded Gaussian for CURE-OR and 77.5% for CURE-TSR). The paper is organized as follows. Section II presents the existing literature on various types of denoising techniques. The proposed filtering-out poor-quality images approach is presented in Section III, while Section IV shows its perfor-mance in terms of recognition accuracy and computational time. Finally, concluding remarks and future works are pro-vided in Section V. II. L ITERATURE REVIEW 

Image data understanding and preparation are the two main phases of the most commonly used data mining process model, namely the Cross-Industry Standard Process for Data Mining (CRISP-DM) model [14]. The cleaning/filtering of image data is crucial step in data preparation that improves image quality and enhances model performance. In image processing, images are denoised as a part of the image preparation process before they are fed into the model. The model learns relevant patterns more quickly and performs better when it is fed clean data. Image denoising has been extensively investigated in various contexts such as medical imaging, surveillance and security, remote sensing, and forensic analysis [15]. However, most of the existing image denoising techniques are based on conventional approaches, which use standard filters [16], [17] to improve the quality of images. Image denoising techniques can be categorized into two broad groups: (1) standard filter-based techniques, and (2) DL-based techniques. DL-based techniques are further classified into two categories: customized DL for denoising and embedded denoising filters in DL. 

A. Standard filter-based image denoising 

There are two types of filters for image denoising: linear and non-linear, each with its advantages and disadvantages. Linear filters include Gaussian, mean, and Wiener filters. Examples of non-linear filters are median and bilateral filters. Linear filters are advantageous owing to their fast processing times but have the disadvantage of not preserving edges effectively. Non-linear filters have the advantage of securing edges and the disadvantage of requiring more time for processing [15]. Among these, the median filter is particularly recognized for its capability to remove salt and pepper (S & P) noise, and is effective in clearing low-density impulse noise, thus improving edge detection. It employs a kernel of a positive odd integer size [18]. In addition, the Gaussian filter is another effective tool for image denoising. Unlike other filters, it provides superior image smoothing and is built on the principles of Gaussian distribution [19]. Equation (1) represents the proba-bility density function of a Gaussian distribution. 

P (x) = 1

√2πσ 2 e−(x−μ)2/(2 σ2) (1) In this equation, x represent the intensity of a pixel at a specific grey level within an image window, μ denotes the average intensity of all pixels in the same window, and σ

signifies the standard deviation. The degree of smoothing in a Gaussian filter is influenced by the standard deviation σ.This filter computes the Gaussian weighted average based on the surrounding pixel neighborhood. It prioritizes spatial proximity in its calculations, ignoring pixel intensity simi-larities and whether a pixel is part of an edge, which may result in edge blurring. This can affect algorithms that rely on edge information, such as segmentation or object detection, by decreasing the sharpness and definition of object boundaries. A mean filter blurs an image by replacing each pixel with the average of its neighboring pixels. Despite its simplicity, it is effective in reducing noise. A Wiener filter is one of the most fundamental methodologies for reducing noise. Wiener filtering eliminates additive noise. The blurring of the image is also inverted [20]. However, this filter has limitations when applied to noisy images in the real world that have complex characteristics. Image denoising can also be accomplished using wavelets [21], [22]. However, it is effective only in dealing with additive white Gaussian noise (AWGN). Without proper adaptation, this denoising technique does not work well for non-stationary noise or impulse noise. To overcome the filter limitations mentioned above, there exist various DL-based denoising techniques that often outperform traditional filtering methods, as discussed below. 

B. DL-based techniques for image denoising 

Image denoising methods have recently developed rapidly based on DL [23], [24], [25], [26]. DL-based techniques are divided into two sections below. 

1) Customized DL techniques for image denoising : The CNN-based denoising techniques use a specific architecture comprising a large number of convolutional layers to effec-tively remove noise from images. Typical examples of this type of architecture include ResNet [8], U-Net [9], and DenseNet [10]. When CNNs are deep, a vanishing gradient problem may occur, but skipping connections between neighboring layers can alleviate this problem. In U-Net, feature mappings are concatenated from the first to last convolutional layer, and from the second to the second-last convolutional layer. Convo-lutional blocks (containing multiple convolutional layers) are connected using skip connections. DenseNet connects convo-lutional layers to one another, overcoming ResNet’s limitations of selectively discarding some layers of information. However, a limitation of DenseNet is its depth. As a solution, [27] exploits wavelet decomposition inde-pendence to divide each convolutional layer into multiple subnetworks, thus overcoming this problem of deep networks. Using a CNN framework that reorganizes numerous convo-lutional layers, the authors provided a novel solution to the issue of vanishing gradients. A large denoising challenge was divided into several smaller, independent challenges using wavelet decomposition. For each issue, noise in the sub-band is eliminated in a particular manner, direction, and size. Using batch normalization and residual learning combined with a CNN, Zhang et al. [28] were able to filter out the noise. CNNs are trained using noisy image patches and noise mapping to achieve blind denoising [29]. To enhance the robustness of a denoiser, the authors used a dual network to extract 3

complementary features from noisy images in [30]. Denoising effects were enhanced by merging several channels, making it possible to extract prominent features [31]. As per [32], blind denoising is a two-phase process. A subnetwork is initially used to estimate the noise. In terms of the second method, optimized methods embedded into a CNN are commonly used for image denoising. To achieve the choice between denoising performance and efficiency, meta-optimizers and CNNs were combined [33]. In addition, Bregman iteration algorithms are particularly effective in converting depth image inpainting into image denoising [34].Ding et al. [35] introduces an unsupervised unified image enhancement network for simul-taneous dehazing and denoising. The framework integrates dehazing, denoising, and fusion modules, leveraging their correlation for improved performance. Experimental results show superior dehazing and noise removal, particularly on real-world hazy datasets. The methods based on CNNs that have been discussed above demonstrate how effective CNNs are at denoising images. However, denoising models based on CNNs may not generalize well to images with different types or levels of noise. To train CNNs, a large amount of labeled data is required. Although noise-free images are abundant, obtaining images with different types of regular and irregular noises for training can be challenging and expensive. Further, robust models must be trained using diverse datasets that capture different types and levels of noise. 

2) Embedded denoising filters in DL: The term “embedded denoising filter” refers to the integration of denoising filters directly into neural network architectures as a separate layer of the network. A key goal of this approach is to enable models to learn denoising as an integral part of their feature extraction and processing process. The authors [30] introduced a conceptual approach called batch-renormalization denoising network (BRDNet) for image denoising, which can extract a clean image directly from a noisy environment. Two networks are combined to increase the network’s width and thus obtain more features. As batch renormalization is incorporated into BRDNet, it can deal with internal covariate shifts and small minibatch problems. Dilated convolutions are exploited as a separate layer to extract more information for denoising tasks. Research findings have indicated that the BRDNet performs steadily across both artificially and naturally noisy images. Nonetheless, it is inef-fective for more complex, real, noisy image denoising, such as low-light and blurred images. Yang et al. [36] introduced a new denoising technique to enhance the performance of intelligent robot welding. The technique uses an attention-dense convolutional block to extract and accumulate multi-scale feature maps. It incorporates a residual bidirectional Conv Long Short-Term Memory (ConvLSTM) block, designed to learn long-range spatial context from localized feature maps, which works as a denoising filter. However, similar to prior DL-based models, it necessitates image resizing, which could either strip away crucial data or introduce unnecessary information, thereby potentially impairing tasks such as event detection and object identification. Another study documented in [37] merges the strengths of the CNN and transformer networks to refine real image denoising processes—crafting a hybrid model known as the Transformer Encoder and Convolutional Decoder Network (TECDNet). This design applies radial basis functions (RBFs) to improve the model’s representation while employing resid-ual CNNs in place of more complex transformers to reduce computational demand. This results in the achievement of leading-edge denoising results on real images with reduced processing resource requirements. However, being efficient in consuming fewer resources, its denoising performance is comparable with other models but not superior. Further, this paper [38] aims to investigate how denoising affects CNN per-formance by first filtering noise from images using traditional denoising methods before they are fed into the CNN model. The authors then embed an image-denoising filter, namely Gaussian or median filters, as a layer into the CNN model. Denoising approaches are evaluated using both CNN accuracy and PSNR distribution. The comparative study provides insight into whether denoising will be used in various CNN-based image analyses, such as autonomous driving, animal detection, and facial recognition. The results of these traditional and embedded denoising methods require improvement in terms of recognition accuracy because only one filter is used as a denoising layer. Therefore, more filters can be added as a denoising layer. All the above-mentioned techniques have the drawback of fixed size image usage, requiring all images to be resized, resulting in the loss of important information. In addition, the main limitation of the embedded techniques is the integration of standard filters. In conclusion, denoising algorithms perform well on certain types of noise or image content, but they have difficulty with images that exhibit different characteristics or variations. It is possible that they are not capable of generalizing across diverse datasets. Most studied denoising algorithms train net-works for different noise strengths and noise types based on the use of different parameter values. Noise in practice can be dynamically influenced by many environmental factors in the scene and/or intrinsic parameters from the camera. It is there-fore essential to improve the robustness of the model against various noise characteristics. Poor-quality images consume additional resources, including the central processing unit (CPU) and storage, and these images confuse or deteriorate the applications’ decision-making processes. This indicates that the removal of these poor-quality images in both training and test sets will result in more accurate decisions. This is the main focus of research in this paper. 

C. Research work motivation 

In practical applications, such as traffic sign detection systems in autonomous vehicles, numerous weather elements, such as rain, shadow, and snow, can degrade image quality by reducing contrast, introducing artefacts, and obscuring details. In addition, water droplets can cause blur and distortion on lenses. DL models incorporate standard filtering techniques for visual analysis. Since most denoising techniques are developed exploiting features of general noises, denoising techniques do not work well for all types of impacts. It is not possible to encode the characteristics of all types of effects using DL-based denoising techniques. To the best of our knowledge, 4

Figure 1: Block diagram of our proposed poor-quality image filtering-out approach. there is no single method that can effectively detect and reduce various environmental and camera impacts, such as rain, SH, DK, and lens blur. The purpose of denoising algorithms is to remove noise from images, but they also inadvertently re-move important information because of the artefacts inherently introduced by the filtering techniques. Therefore, to improve the recognition/detection accuracy, only images with sufficient information and clarity are required to be kept in the dataset. This challenging research gap can be addressed by filtering out the poor-quality images directly rather than using image denoising techniques for various environmental and camera impacts. III. M ETHODOLOGY 

The following sections in this paper present our proposed approach for filtering out poor-quality images. Figure 1 rep-resents the schematic diagram of our proposed approach. In this block diagram, first, the historical data is used to filter out poor-quality images using quality metrics. Once the poor-quality images are filtered out using the threshold value of the quality metric, the CNN model is employed to calculate the recognition accuracy. 1) 1) Block 1 signifies the historical dataset. For a variety of tasks, including object recognition, image classification, and segmentation, historical data is used to develop the machine learning model. To train DL models, historical data is used as the foundation. There are two parts to the development process: (i) creating a training model, and (ii) selecting the appropriate machine learning model structure using the validation dataset. Therefore, histori-cal data have two parts: (i) training, and (ii) a validation dataset to train machine learning models. During the training process, validation sets are used to evaluate a DL model’s performance. Training models on diverse historical datasets allows them to generalize better and perform better on different test data. 2) Block 2 filters out poor-quality images from the his-torical dataset and Block 3 is a CNN learning model. As mentioned in the motivation section, to improve recognition/detection accuracy, we need to filter out poor-quality images that can confuse a model in both the training and testing phases. Therefore, in Block 2, we filter out poor-quality images from the historical dataset used in developing a DL model. Equation (2) represents our filtering criterion for filtering poor-quality images from the dataset: 

[Bm, Q t] = Dm(h, ϵ, t p) (2) where, Dm(h, ϵ, t p) denotes a function which devel-ops the learning model after filtering-out poor-quality images. It returns the built model Bm and optimum image quality threshold Qt i.e., the threshold for which the learning model ( Bm) maximises the recognition accuracy. 

h represents the historical dataset and ϵ represents a threshold to make sure that sufficient images are re-maining after filtering-out the poor-quality images for developing the CNN training model. tp is percentage of training set. The function of Dm(h, ϵ, t p) is detailed in Algorithm 1, which explains the developing CNN model. First, we calculate the quality scores for all images in historical dataset h using an image quality assessment metric in Steps 3-5 of Algorithm 1. Any image quality assessment metric can be used to filter out poor-quality images. We filter out poor-quality images that are below the particular value of quality scores in Steps 9-13. We then calculate the % of filtered images, which should be greater than or equal to ϵ images (Step 14). For the given tp, we divide the filtered images into training and validation sets (Step 15). Next, we develop the training model using the training set and calculate the accuracy of the trained model using the validation set (Step 17). Finally, we check that, if the accuracy is maximum and the % of filtered images is greater than ϵ, the quality scores are set to the optimum image quality threshold ( Qt). We store the trained model in the built model (Step 21) to use it for testing purposes. It is used to recognize/detect different objects in images. We 5

select the CNN model because it is the best model for image analysis, including object recognition, compared with filters and transformers [39]. The CNN model has very little complexity since it consists of a few convolutional layers, pooling layers, fully connected layers, and a softmax layer for generating the final output. The hyperparameters for the CNN model can be selected after tuning the training model and can be varied based on the complexity of the datasets. The hyperparameters, including the number of epochs and layers, can be selected, which minimizes training and validation loss. 

Algorithm 1 Algorithm for developing CNN learning model 

Require: historical dataset ( h), ϵ represents minimum % of remaining filtered images; training percentage ( tp)

Ensure: built model, optimal quality threshold Qt 

> 1:

Ai = 0  

> 2:

Qt = 0 

// calculate the quality of all historical images  

> 3:

for image in historical dataset do  

> 4:

quality score (image ) = cal quality score (image ) 

> 5:

end for  

> 6:

filtered images = historical dataset  

> 7:

temp historical dataset = historical dataset  

> 8:

for i = 0 .1 to 1 do  

> 9:

for image in temp historical dataset do  

> 10:

if quality score (image ) < i then  

> 11:

remove image from filtered images  

> 12:

end if  

> 13:

end for 

// calculate the percentage of filtered images  

> 14:

filtered images% = (# filtered images /

#historical dataset) ×100  

> 15:

[training set, validation set]=divide (filtered images, training percentage)  

> 16:

[trained model]=train(training set, model, criterion, optimizer, #epoch)  

> 17:

[A]=evaluate (validation set, trained model, criterion) // find the optimal quality threshold and trained model  

> 18:

if Ai < A AND filtered images% ≥ ϵ then  

> 19:

Ai = A // keep the improved accuracy  

> 20:

Qt = i // set optimum image quality threshold to i  

> 21:

built model=trained model  

> 22:

end if  

> 23:

i = i + 0 .1

temp historical dataset = filtered images  

> 24:

end for 

3) Block 4 is the CNN testing model and Block 5 filters out poor-quality images from observed images. In Algorithm 2, first, we calculate the quality scores for all images in the test set (Steps 2-3). Second, we filter out poor-quality images from the test set using the optimum image quality threshold ( Qt) calculated in Algorithm 1. The filtering-out technique will decide whether filtering is required or not. The trained model is employed to test filtered observed images in Block 4. 4) Block 6 contains observed images. These images are captured from the camera affected by environmental and camera impacts and will be stored in a test set, which will be further utilized for filtering out poor-quality images. 5) Block 7 represents recognition results. We calculate the maximum recognition accuracy A and computational time C with the CNN testing model which is given in Block 4. The CNN testing model is a model that will be applied in image processing applications. 

Algorithm 2 Algorithm for testing CNN model 

Require: test set, built model Bm, optimal quality threshold 

Qt

Ensure: recognition accuracy A, computational time C  

> 1:

filtered test images = test set  

> 2:

for image in test set do  

> 3:

quality score (image ) = cal quality score (image ) 

> 4:

if quality score (image ) < Q t then  

> 5:

remove image from filtered test images  

> 6:

end if  

> 7:

end for 

// get the test results using the filtered test images  

> 8:

[A, C] = evaluate (filtered test images, Bm, criterion) IV. R ESULTS AND DISCUSSIONS 

This section covers experimental setup, datasets used in our experiments, CNN model structure, and finally, the results based on our experiments. In our experiments, we first deter-mine the optimum quality threshold value based on a historical (validation) dataset. Next, we filter out poor-quality images from the dataset based on the optimum quality threshold value. Finally, we use the CNN model to calculate the traffic sign, object recognition accuracy, and computational time. To show the efficacy of our proposed filtering out approach, we compared our proposed approach with baseline approaches such as “without denoising”, “embedded median”, “embedded Gaussian”, “traditional median”, and “traditional Gaussian” and demonstrated the efficacy of our results. 

A. Experimental setup 

Our experiments were conducted on an HP Zbook 15 G6 laptop with an Intel Core i7 vPro 9th Gen processor and an NVIDIA Quadro T1000 GPU. The HP Zbook has a physical memory of 32 GB. Using the PyTorch library, we implemented our model using Python in Visual Studio Code software. 

B. Datasets 

The CURE-TSR [12] and CURE-OR [13] datasets were used for filtering. These datasets contain both real and syn-thetic images embedded with noise generated from the en-vironment and the camera. There are five different levels of noise in both datasets: (i) extreme less, (ii) less, (iii) moderate, (iv) high, and (v) extreme high. However, the percentage of noise level is not provided in either dataset. Among the 6

Figure 2: Different orientations (stuffed animal) of the same object with the same background in CURE-OR dataset [13]. 

Figure 3: Different backgrounds (stuffed animal) of the same object with the same orientation in CURE-OR dataset [13]. different traffic sign types in CURE-TSR are speed limit, goods vehicles, no entry, priority to, no left, no stopping, no overtaking, no parking, bicycle, stop, hump, no right, parking and yield. For various environmental impacts such as rain, SH, DK, and snow, we use all traffic sign images, including those shown in Block 1 of Figure 1. Camera impacts include lens blur and lens dirtiness, which are two of the most prominent impacts. CURE-OR comprises 23 toy categories, 10 personal item categories, 27 household item categories, 14 office item cate-gories, 10 sports/entertainment categories, and 16 health cate-gories. This dataset contains 100 classes of traffic signs, while CURE-TSR contains 14 classes. Five types of orientations of the same objects with the same background were used for the CURE-OR dataset, as shown in Figure 2. Images for lens dirtiness, lens blur, OE , S & P noise, CT, and UE impacts were taken from the CURE-OR dataset, which includes all 100 object classes. As per the literature, complex/cluttered backgrounds make it difficult to recognize objects [40]. To demonstrate the type of backgrounds used with the CURE-OR dataset images, Figure 3 shows an example of a set of images with the various backgrounds. To test the accuracy of the traffic sign detection CNN model, we used 36458 training and 16670 test images. A total of 11220 training images and 3750 test images are used in the CURE-OR dataset. We divided both datasets (CURE-TSR and CURE-OR) into two equal parts: (i) Historical dataset: it is further divided into training (i.e., 80%) and validation (i.e., 20%). The validation set was used to select the optimal quality threshold value and the epoch num-ber. (ii) Performance analysis dataset (test dataset): The other half dataset is used for the performance analysis of recognition accuracy and CPU time. In the CURE-TSR dataset, the historical dataset contains the first 1-7, and the performance analysis dataset includes classes from 8-14 classes of traffic signs. In the CURE-OR dataset, the first half dataset that is used as historical data contains all backgrounds of images of 100 types but includes only front (0 ◦), left (90 ◦), and half of the historical dataset of back (180 ◦) orientation as shown in Figure 2. The other half i.e., the performance analysis dataset includes half the dataset of back (180 ◦), and all right (270 ◦)and top oriented dataset. 

C. Description of the CNN model and its parameters 

Our CNN model consists of three convolutional layers, three fully connected layers and two max-pooling layers. We used a softmax classifier, which gives probabilities for each class label, as shown in Table I. Based on [39], we used 55 epochs for our CNN model. A learning rate of 0.1 was used for our experiments. For our experiments, we used 256 batch sizes. Table I: Various parameters and their type/values for CNN.          

> Parameter Type/Value
> Epochs 55 Learning rate 0.1 Batch size 256 Classifer Softmax Activation function ReLU Max-pooling 2Convolutional layers 3Fully connected layers 3

D. Performance metrics 

We use two metrics to measure the performance of the system which are given below. 

a) Recognition accuracy: The ability of a computer system to identify or classify objects, patterns, or features in an image or video stream is called “recognition”; thus, it is assessed by recognition accuracy. Recognition accuracy is the ratio of the number of correct predictions to the total number of predictions. 

b) Computational time: Computational time analysis measures the time it takes for a computer system to perform a specific task, such as recognition or classification. As it affects overall system performance and efficiency, this is an important metric in computer vision and pattern recognition. Besides computational complexity analysis, computational time is also measured by CPU time. It is the testing time for recognizing the objects and was measured in seconds for our experiments. 

E. Experimental results for CURE-OR dataset 

As per the literature, the SSIM is the most reliable image quality assessment metric used to assess image quality [41]. We utilized SSIM for filtering-out poor-quality images. Fol-lowing are the experimental results for the CURE-OR dataset. 

1) Estimating the threshold for filtering-out poor-quality images for CURE-OR dataset: Table II refers to different impacts in the CURE-OR dataset and the selected SSIM threshold values for filtering-out poor-quality images. For example, how recognition accuracy varies with the SSIM threshold value is shown in Figure 4. For lens dirty, the recognition accuracy decreases with an increase in the SSIM value and it is maximum (93.6%) at SSIM value = 0.1 and the 7

Table II: Various impacts in CURE-OR and their optimum image quality (SSIM) threshold values. Note, OSTV represents optimum SSIM threshold value and RI is the remaining images.                      

> Impact OSTV Accuracy(%) RI(%)
> Lens blur 0.9 88.4 20 Lens dirty 0.1 93.6 100 S & P 0.02 87.5 64 CT 0.1 97.5 100 OE 0.9 20.8 12 UE 0.1 52.8 100

Figure 4: Object recognition accuracy vs SSIM threshold value for lens dirty validation dataset of CURE-OR. Note, that SSIM threshold values were used for filtering-out poor-quality images from both training and validation datasets. percentage of remaining images is 100. Thus, SSIM value 0.1 is utilized as a filtering criterion for the performance analysis of recognition accuracy versus SSIM for lens dirty. Similarly, for CT and UE, the recognition accuracy is maximum at SSIM value = 0.1. For CT, the maximum recognition accuracy is 97.5% and 52.8% for UE. In both impacts, the percentage of remaining images is 100. In lens blur, the object recognition accuracy increases with the rise in SSIM value above 0.5. It reaches its maximum accuracy (88.4%) at SSIM value = 0.9. At this SSIM value, the percent of remaining images is 20 as shown in Table II. Therefore, we selected SSIM threshold value of 0.9 for filtering-out poor-quality images in lens blur from the historical dataset. For S & P, the recognition accuracy increases with an increase in SSIM until it reaches the value of 0.02 and then it gradually decreases. The maximum recognition accuracy is 87.5% at SSIM value = 0.02, and the remaining images are 64%. For OE, the recognition accuracy reaches its maximum value (20.8%) at SSIM value = 0.9. Therefore, in all impacts covered in the CURE-OR dataset, the relevant SSIM values are selected based on their corresponding maximum recognition accuracies in the historical dataset. 

2) Performance analysis: To analyse the performance of the CNN model using our proposed filtering-out poor-quality images approach, as alluded before, we chose recognition accuracy and computational time as the two metrics. Below are the results for recognition accuracy and computational time. 

a) Recognition accuracy analysis: We tested the traf-fic sign and object recognition accuracy of our filtering-out Table III: Object recognition (OR) accuracy (%) of CNN in different environmental and camera impacts with various denoising approaches for CURE-OR.                                           

> OR accuracy for each impact (%) Approach Impact Blur Dirty S & P CT OE UE Mean
> Without De-noising 89.3 95.6 81.8 96.6 0.96 98 77 Embedded median 85.12 84.2 73.2 90.6 0.96 89.1 70.5 Embedded Gaussian 91.5 94 85.3 95.3 0.96 97.7 77.4 Traditional median 90.5 93.6 84 95.6 0.96 97.4 77 Traditional Gaussian 91.1 94.08 83.6 96 0.96 96 76.9 Proposed filtering-out
> 95.2 95.6 87.6 96.6 36.6 98 84.9

approach against approaches without denoising, traditional denoising and CNN-based embedded denoising. The recog-nition accuracy of CURE-OR is mentioned in Table III. The table shows the comparison of object recognition accuracy with our proposed filtering-out approach and other denoising approaches (embedded and traditional) using median and Gaussian filters and no denoising. To illustrate, in lens blur, our proposed filtering-out approach has maximum recognition accuracy i.e., 95.2% in comparison with other denoising techniques. This is because the poor-quality images with an SSIM of less than 0.9 are being filtered out in our proposed approach (see Table II) rather than denoising images with median and Gaussian filter traditionally and in CNN-based embedded approach. The minimum recognition accuracy in lens blur is for the embedded median approach which is 85.12%. In lens dirty, filtering-out (95.6%) and without denoising (95.6%) approaches achieve a superior performance compared with other traditional and CNN-based embedded approaches. Various types of distortions and artefacts can be introduced into an image via dirty lenses, such as blurring, streaks, smudges, and lens flares. In contrast with typical noise or blur patterns that Gaussian and median filters are designed to handle, these artefacts are often more complex and irregular. Therefore, it is better to filter out poor-quality images with an SSIM of less than 0.1 rather than denoise images using median and Gaussian filters. Similarly, for S & P, the filtering-out approach has maximum recognition accuracy (i.e., 87.6%) compared with other ap-proaches. In contrast, the filtering-out approach (96.6%) and the approach without denoising work better compared with other approaches. In some cases, Gaussian and median filters can improve CT as a result of noise reduction or outlier removal, but they are not specialized tools used for this pur-pose. Therefore, for CT, the approach filtering-out poor-quality images appears to be an effective vehicle. Similar results can be seen in the UE as it has maximum recognition accuracy in filtering-out and without denoising approaches. In OE, the performance of the filtering-out approach (36.6%) is the best in contrast with other traditional and embedded approaches. 8

OE typically results in loss of detail and clipping of pixel values in the highlights, which cannot be fully recovered using basic filtering techniques such as median and Gaussian filters. Since we have multiple exposures of the same scene, filtering-out overexposed images may still leave us with enough data from other exposures to generate a good result, as is reflected in Table III. Overall, our proposed approach has maximum average accuracy for all impacts (i.e., 84.9%) among the state-of-the-art approaches which demonstrates the effectiveness of our proposed approach. Table IV: Computational time (CPU time in seconds) per image for object recognition in different impacts with various denoising approaches for CURE-OR.                                      

> Computational time (seconds) for each impact Approach Impact Blur Dirty S & P CT OE UE
> Without de-noising 2.98 3.27 3.36 3.26 2.98 2.94
> Embedded median 3.12 3.41 3.47 2.96 3.04 3.10 Embedded Gaussian 3.21 3.37 3.88 3.42 3.22 3.36 Traditional median 3.18 3.27 3.43 3.20 3.19 3.17 Traditional Gaussian 3.17 3.24 3.31 3.20 3.12 3.13 Proposed filtering-out
> 2.60 3.5 3.03 3.09 2.74 3.25

b) Computational time analysis: It is reflected in Table IV that, for lens blur (2.6s), S & P (3.03s), and OE (2.74s), the filtering-out approach takes minimum computational time per image. Gaussian filters replace each pixel in an image with a weighted average of its neighbours based on a Gaussian distribution, whereas median filters replace each pixel in an image with the median value of its neighbours. To obtain the median value, neighbouring pixels must be sorted, and the Gaussian weighted average is required for Gaussian filters, which are computationally expensive, especially in datasets such as CURE-OR containing larger-sized images. In contrast, we are filtering-out poor-quality images in which the SSIM is below an optimum threshold value (0.9). In the above-mentioned impacts, many images (79.2% of historical dataset images, see Table II) are discarded based on the optimal threshold value of the SSIM. In other impacts such as CT, our proposed approach takes the second-lowest time. The lens dirty, and UE takes more computational time because the SSIM value is 0.1. Since the filtering-out poor-quality images start from SSIM = 0.1 (see Step 8 of Algorithm 1), it appears that no images were filtered out (i.e., all historical images were kept). Consequentially, no images were filtered out during testing (i.e., while calculating recognition accuracy) which took more computational time as compared to the other impacts where a lot of images were discarded. Table II reflects the percentage of historical images left after filtering-out images based on the optimum threshold value of SSIM. 

F. Experimental results for CURE-TSR dataset 

This section provides the results for optimum threshold selection for the CURE-TSR dataset. An analysis of the 

Figure 5: SSIM threshold value vs object recognition accuracy for SH validation dataset of CURE-TSR. performance of recognition accuracy and computational time is also discussed in this section. 

1) Estimating the optimum threshold for filtering-out poor-quality images for CURE-TSR dataset: Table V shows var-ious impacts and their chosen SSIM threshold values for the CURE-TSR dataset. As shown in Figure 5, for SH, the maximum accuracy (81.8%) is seen at SSIM value = 0.4.The fraction of remaining images is 20% (refer to Table V). For lens blur, the maximum accuracy (76.7%) is at SSIM value = 0.5 and the remaining fraction of images after filtering out poor-quality images is 20%. Similar patterns are observed in lens dirty and it has maximum recognition accuracy (80.7%) at SSIM value = 0.6 and it has 80% of remaining images after filtering-out poor-quality images. For rain, maximum accuracy (78.7%) is achieved at SSIM value = 0.1. Similarly, the maximum recognition accuracy (81.4%) for snow is seen at SSIM value = 0.8, and the fraction of remaining images is 80%. Based on these selected threshold values, we analyse the performance of our CNN model which is covered in the following section. Table V: Various impacts in CURE-TSR and their optimum image quality (SSIM) threshold values. Note, that OSTV represents the optimum SSIM threshold value and RI is the remaining images.                      

> Impact OSTV Accuracy (%) RI (%)
> Lens blur 0.5 76.7 20 Lens dirty 0.6 80.7 80 Rain 0.1 78.7 100 SH 0.4 81.8 20 Snow 0.8 81.4 80 DK 0.05 79.8 80

2) Performance analysis: The following is an analysis of the performance of the CURE-TSR dataset in terms of recognition accuracy and computation time. 

a) Recognition accuracy analysis: The recognition accu-racy of CURE-TSR, along with other approaches is revealed in Table III. Our proposed approach has maximum traffic sign recognition accuracy for impacts such as lens blur (91.3%), lens dirty (94.3%), snow (95.1%), rain (92.6%), and SH (95.3%) in comparison with other approaches. 9

Table VI: Traffic sign recognition (TSR) accuracy (%) of CNN in different environmental and camera impacts with various denoising approaches for CURE-TSR.                                            

> TSR accuracy for each impact (%) Approach Impact Blur Dirty Rain Snow SH DK Mean
> Without De-noising 86.9 94.2 92.6 0.7 95 95.6 77.5 Embedded median 71.8 87.6 84.4 35.6 90.7 89.2 76.5 Embedded Gaussian 71.3 88.1 86.3 1.9 91.1 89.2 71.3 Traditional median 73.3 85.3 79.5 35.6 87.8 84.8 74.3 Traditional Gaussian 70.3 80.4 74.9 1.9 83.3 1.9 52.1 Proposed filtering-out
> 91.3 94.3 92.6 95.1 95.3 94.5 93.8

In DK, our proposed approach has the second highest recognition accuracy, whereas the approach without denoising achieves the maximum recognition accuracy (i.e., 95.6%). Therefore, it is concluded that none of the discussed tech-niques works for denoising of DK. There is a need for image enhancement algorithms that can help to improve the quality and fidelity of dark regions in images, enhancing their overall visual impact and interpretability. Besides this, our filtering-out approach produces the highest recognition accuracy for other impacts. For rain, along with the filtering approach, without filtering also achieves the highest accuracy (i.e., 92.6%). Overall, the average accuracy of our proposed approach is 93.8%, which is the highest when compared with other state-of-the-art approaches. The average improvement in accuracy achieved for almost all impacts vindicates the effectiveness of our filtering out approach. Table VII: Computational time (CPU time in seconds) per image for traffic sign recognition in different impacts with various denoising approaches in CURE-TSR.                                     

> Computational time (seconds) for each impact Approach Impact Blur Dirty Rain Snow SH DK
> Without De-noising 0.395 0.381 0.392 0.416 0.398 0.406 Embedded median 0.363 0.378 0.391 0.374 0.375 0.398 Embedded Gaussian
> 0.256 0.265 0.262 0.257 0.277 0.262
> Traditional median 0.332 0.369 0.391 0.311 0.321 0.310 Traditional Gaussian 0.299 0.367 0.388 0.312 0.310 0.321 Proposed filtering-out 0.362 0.328 0.329 0.311 0.310 0.278

b) Computational time analysis: Table IV shows the computational time for all approaches including our proposed approach. Our proposed approach takes the second lowest computational time per image for impacts such as lens dirty (0.32s), rain (0.32s), snow (0.31s), SH (0.31s), DK (0.27s) in comparison with other approaches. For lens blur, it takes 0.36s, which is third lowest computational time. The embedded Gaussian approach takes the least compu-tational time for all impacts. A Gaussian filter is a linear operation that can be efficiently implemented using convo-lution operations, which are computationally fast, especially when the images are smaller in size and when optimized using libraries such as TensorFlow or PyTorch. Gaussian filtering is relatively simpler and more efficient than some non-linear denoising methods that involve complex operations such as thresholding or iterative optimization. However, even though the embedded Gaussian approach may provide com-putational advantages, it has very less recognition accuracy for all impacts in comparison with our proposed filtering-out approach. For instance, the recognition accuracy of lens blur from embedded Gaussian filtering is 71.3%. In contrast, the recognition accuracy of lens blur in our proposed filtering out approach is 91.3%. Therefore, slightly longer computation time is regarded as acceptable when the merits of improved accuracy for almost all impacts obtained using the filtering out approach are perceived. The embedded Gaussian approach does not always provide the best denoising performance, especially in scenarios with complex noise patterns or high noise levels. Because of this, it is important to consider both computational efficiency and denoising performance when choosing a denoising approach. V. C ONCLUSIONS 

In this paper, we proposed an approach for filtering out poor-quality images by exploiting the assessed image quality. For evaluation, the SSIM was used to calculate the image quality because the SSIM is one of the most reliable image quality assessment metrics. We analyzed the performance without applying any denoising techniques, denoising with standard filters and CNN-based denoising techniques to prove the efficacy of our proposed approach. The performance of CNN was assessed in terms of recognition accuracy and computational time. Extensive experiments were conducted on two public datasets (CURE-TSR and CURE-OR). The experimental results demonstrate that our proposed filtering-out approach performs best in terms of recognition accuracy for most of the environmental and camera impacts in both CURE-TSR and CURE-OR datasets. In terms of computa-tional time, our approach is comparable with other methods and it is lowest for lens blur, S & P, and OE. Even though it was difficult to get superior results for all environmental and camera impacts, the results show that our method has improved recognition accuracy for all impact types, except DK for the CURE-TSR dataset. For DK, the without denoising approach achievesd 95.6% recognition accuracy compared with 94.5% accuracy obtained using our approach (see Table IV). Conversely, we only worked with two datasets and two applications in this work. The use of other image-recognition benchmark datasets for different applications could be the future direction that makes filtering-out approach applicable to other real-world applications involving different types of image analysis, including image segmentation and recognition such as surveillance and security, forensic analysis and remote sensing. 10 

REFERENCES [1] M. Nassereddine and A. Khang, “Applications of internet of things (iot) in smart cities,” in Advanced IoT Technologies and Applications in the Industry 4.0 Digital Economy . CRC Press, 2024, pp. 109–136. [2] R. K. Kasera, S. Gour, and T. Acharjee, “A comprehensive survey on iot and ai based applications in different pre-harvest, during-harvest and post-harvest activities of smart agriculture,” Computers and Electronics in Agriculture , vol. 216, p. 108522, 2024. [3] S. Mittal, S. Srivastava, and J. P. Jayanth, “A survey of deep learning techniques for underwater image classification,” IEEE Transactions on Neural Networks and Learning Systems , 2022. [4] R. S. Jebur, M. H. B. M. Zabil, D. A. Hammood, and L. K. Cheng, “A comprehensive review of image denoising in deep learning,” Multimedia Tools and Applications , pp. 1–19, 2023. [5] S. Izadi, D. Sutton, and G. Hamarneh, “Image denoising in the deep learning era,” Artificial Intelligence Review , vol. 56, no. 7, pp. 5929– 5974, 2023. [6] R. Kaur, G. Karmakar, F. Xia, and M. Imran, “Deep learning: survey of environmental and camera impacts on internet of things images,” 

Artificial Intelligence Review , pp. 1–34, 2023. [7] M. Monajati and E. Kabir, “A modified inexact arithmetic median filter for removing salt-and-pepper noise from gray-level images,” IEEE Transactions on Circuits and Systems II: Express Briefs , vol. 67, no. 4, pp. 750–754, 2019. [8] Y. Tai, J. Yang, X. Liu, and C. Xu, “Memnet: A persistent memory network for image restoration,” in Proceedings of the IEEE international conference on computer vision , 2017, pp. 4539–4547. [9] K. He, X. Zhang, S. Ren, and J. Sun, “Deep residual learning for image recognition,” in Proceedings of the IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern recognition , 2016, pp. 770–778. [10] O. Ronneberger, P. Fischer, and T. Brox, “U-net: Convolutional networks for biomedical image segmentation,” in Medical Image Computing and Computer-Assisted Intervention–MICCAI 2015: 18th International Conference, Munich, Germany, October 5-9, 2015, Proceedings, Part III 18 . Springer, 2015, pp. 234–241. [11] W. Wu, M. Chen, Y. Xiang, Y. Zhang, and Y. Yang, “Recent progress in image denoising: A training strategy perspective,” IET Image Processing ,vol. 17, no. 6, pp. 1627–1657, 2023. [12] D. Temel, T. Alshawi, M.-H. Chen, and G. AlRegib, “Challenging environments for traffic sign detection: Reliability assessment under inclement conditions,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1902.06857 , 2019. [13] D. Temel, J. Lee, and G. AlRegib, “Cure-or: Challenging unreal and real environments for object recognition,” in 2018 17th IEEE international conference on machine learning and applications (ICMLA) . IEEE, 2018, pp. 137–144. [14] L. T. N. Dinh, G. Karmakar, and J. Kamruzzaman, “A survey on context awareness in big data analytics for business applications,” Knowledge and Information Systems , vol. 62, no. 9, pp. 3387–3415, 2020. [15] S. Bharati, T. Z. Khan, P. Podder, and N. Q. Hung, “A comparative analysis of image denoising problem: noise models, denoising filters and applications,” Cognitive Internet of Medical Things for Smart Healthcare: Services and Applications , pp. 49–66, 2021. [16] H. Ding, H. Zhang, G. Fu, C. Jiang, F. Luo, C. Xiao, and M. Xu, “Towards high-quality photorealistic image style transfer,” IEEE Trans-actions on Multimedia , vol. 26, pp. 9892–9905, 2024. [17] C. Wang, J. Lin, and X. Li, “Structural-equation-modeling-based indica-tor systems for image quality assessment,” IEEE Transactions on Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence , vol. 47, no. 8, pp. 7093–7107, 2025. [18] S. Kumar, U. Bhardwaj, and T. Poongodi, “Cartoonify an image using open cv in python,” in 2022 3rd International Conference on Intelligent Engineering and Management (ICIEM) . IEEE, 2022, pp. 952–955. [19] A. Buades, B. Coll, and J.-M. Morel, “A review of image denoising algorithms, with a new one,” Multiscale modeling & simulation , vol. 4, no. 2, pp. 490–530, 2005. [20] D. Puri and S. K. Mishra, “Analysis of image restoration techniques at different noises,” Int. J. Comput. Sci. Inf. Technol , vol. 8, no. 3, pp. 439–442, 2017. [21] H. Zhang, D. Zheng, Y. Zhang, J. Cao, W. Lin, and W.-K. Ling, “Quality assessment for dibr-synthesized views based on wavelet transform and gradient magnitude similarity,” IEEE Transactions on Multimedia ,vol. 26, pp. 6834–6847, 2024. [22] Y. Huang, J. Huang, J. Liu, M. Yan, Y. Dong, J. Lv, C. Chen, and S. Chen, “Wavedm: Wavelet-based diffusion models for image restoration,” IEEE Transactions on Multimedia , vol. 26, pp. 7058–7073, 2024. [23] Y. Han and J. C. Ye, “Framing u-net via deep convolutional framelets: Application to sparse-view ct,” IEEE transactions on medical imaging ,vol. 37, no. 6, pp. 1418–1429, 2018. [24] S. Yuan, X. Li, Y. Miao, H. Zhang, X. Liu, and R. H. Deng, “Combating noisy labels by alleviating the memorization of dnns to noisy labels,” 

IEEE Transactions on Multimedia , vol. 27, pp. 597–609, 2025. [25] J. Huang, K. Chen, Y. Ren, J. Sun, X. Pu, and C. Zhu, “Cross-domain low-dose ct image denoising with semantic preservation and noise alignment,” IEEE Transactions on Multimedia , vol. 26, pp. 8771– 8782, 2024. [26] D. Zhang, F. Zhou, Y. Jiang, F. Albu, Y. Wei, X. Yang, and Q. Li, “Unleashing the power of self-supervised image denoising: A comprehensive review,” Computer Vision and Image Understanding , vol. 269, p. 104786, 2026. [Online]. Available: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S1077314226001530 [27] G. Liu, M. Dang, J. Liu, R. Xiang, Y. Tian, and N. Luo, “True wide convolutional neural network for image denoising,” 

Information Sciences , vol. 610, pp. 171–184, 2022. [Online]. Available: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0020025522008118 [28] K. Zhang, W. Zuo, Y. Chen, D. Meng, and L. Zhang, “Beyond a gaussian denoiser: Residual learning of deep cnn for image denoising,” IEEE transactions on image processing , vol. 26, no. 7, pp. 3142–3155, 2017. [29] K. Zhang, W. Zuo, and L. Zhang, “Ffdnet: Toward a fast and flexible solution for cnn-based image denoising,” IEEE Transactions on Image Processing , vol. 27, no. 9, pp. 4608–4622, 2018. [30] C. Tian, Y. Xu, and W. Zuo, “Image denoising using deep cnn with batch renormalization,” Neural Networks , vol. 121, pp. 461–473, 2020. [31] Z. Peng, W. Huang, and S. Gu, “Proceedings of the ieee/cvf international conference on computer vision (iccv),” 2021. [32] H. Wang and J. Zhang, “Proceedings of the ieee/cvf conference on computer vision and pattern recognition,” 2020. [33] B. O. Alawode and M. Alfarraj, “Meta-optimization of deep cnn for image denoising using lstm,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2107.06845 , 2021. [34] Z. Li and J. Wu, “Learning deep cnn denoiser priors for depth image inpainting,” Applied Sciences , vol. 9, no. 6, p. 1103, 2019. [35] B. Ding, R. Zhang, L. Xu, G. Liu, S. Yang, Y. Liu, and Q. Zhang, “U2d2net: Unsupervised unified image dehazing and denoising network for single hazy image enhancement,” IEEE Transactions on Multimedia ,vol. 26, pp. 202–217, 2024. [36] L. Yang, J. Fan, B. Huo, E. Li, and Y. Liu, “Image denoising of seam images with deep learning for laser vision seam tracking,” IEEE Sensors Journal , vol. 22, no. 6, pp. 6098–6107, 2022. [37] M. Zhao, G. Cao, X. Huang, and L. Yang, “Hybrid transformer-cnn for real image denoising,” IEEE Signal Processing Letters , vol. 29, pp. 1252–1256, 2022. [38] R. Kaur, G. Karmakar, and M. Imran, “Impact of traditional and em-bedded image denoising on cnn-based deep learning,” Applied Sciences ,vol. 13, no. 20, p. 11560, 2023. [39] D. Temel, T. Alshawi, M. Chen, and G. AlRegib, “Cure-tsd: Challenging unreal and real environments for traffic sign detection,” IEEE Transac-tions on Intelligent Transportation Systems , 2017. [40] G. Golcarenarenji, I. Martinez-Alpiste, Q. Wang, and J. M. Alcaraz-Calero, “Machine-learning-based top-view safety monitoring of ground workforce on complex industrial sites,” Neural Computing and Appli-cations , vol. 34, no. 6, pp. 4207–4220, 2022. [41] R. Kaur, G. Karmakar, and F. Xia, “Evaluating outdoor environmental impacts for image understanding and preparation,” in Image Processing and Intelligent Computing Systems . CRC Press, 2023, pp. 267–295. 

Roopdeep Kaur received a B.Tech in Electronics and Communication from Punjab Technical Univer-sity in 2016, an M.E. from Thapar University in 2018, and a Ph.D. from Federation University Aus-tralia in 2024. Her research focuses on the Internet of Things, image processing, and data analytics. 11 

Gour Karmakar (M’01) received his Ph.D. in IT from Monash University in 2003 and is currently a Professor at Federation University Australia. With over 193 peer-reviewed publications, including 52 in reputed journals, his research is supported by industry and competitive grants, including an ARC Linkage Grant in 2011. His interests include multi-media signal processing, AI, IoT, and cybersecurity. 

Muhammad Imran is a Senior Lecturer at the Institute of Innovation, Science, and Sustainability, Federation University Australia. His research fo-cuses on mobile and wireless networks, IoT, big data analytics, cloud/edge computing, and information security. He leads the Wireless Networks and Secu-rity (WINS) research group and has collaborated on numerous international research projects. With over 300 publications in leading conferences and journals, he was recognized as a 2022 Clarivate Highly Cited Researcher in Computer Science. He has held edito-rial roles in prestigious journals, including IEEE Network, FGCS, and IEEE Communications Magazine, and has been named an Outstanding Associate Editor multiple times.