Title: FeatMap: Understanding image manipulation in the feature space and its implications for feature space geometry

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2605.11203v1

Published Time: Wed, 13 May 2026 00:18:00 GMT

Number of Pages: 27

Markdown Content:
# FeatMap: Understanding image manipulations in the feature space and its implications for feature space geometry 

Elias B. Krey 

Division AI4Health Carl von Ossietzky Universität Oldenburg Oldenburg, Germany 

elias.benedict.krey@uol.de 

Nils Neukirch 

Division AI4Health Carl von Ossietzky Universität Oldenburg Oldenburg, Germany 

nils.neukirch@uol.de 

Nils Strodthoff 

Division AI4Health Carl von Ossietzky Universität Oldenburg Oldenburg, Germany 

nils.strodthoff@uol.de 

Abstract 

Intermediate feature representations represent the backbone for the expressivity and adaptability of deep neural networks. However, their geometric structure remains poorly understood. In this submission, we provide indirect insights into this matter by applying a broad selection of manipulations in input space, ranging from geometric and photometric transformations to local masking and semantic manipulations using generative image editing models, and assess the feasibility of learning a mapping in the feature space, mapping from the original to the manipu-lated feature map. To this end, we devise different types of mappings, from linear to non-linear and local to global mappings and assess both the reconstruction quality of the mapping as well as the semantic content of the mapped representations. We demonstrate the feasibility of learning such mappings for all considered transforma-tions. While global (transformer) models that operate on the full feature map often achieve best results, we show that the same can be achieved with a shared linear model operating on a single feature vector typically with very little degradation in reconstruction quality, even for highly non-trivial semantic manipulations. We analyze the corresponding mappings across different feature layers and characterize them according to dominance of weight vs. bias and the effective rank of the linear transformations. These results provide hints for the hypothesis that the feature space is to a first degree of approximation organized in linear structures. From a broader perspective, the study demonstrates that generative image editing models might open the door to a deeper understanding of the feature space through input manipulation. 

1 Introduction 

Understanding deep neural networks, including their properties and reasoning patterns, relies heavily on an understanding of internal representations. For this reason, the characterization of intermediate feature representations has been a core interest of concept-based and mechanistic explainable AI, see [ 1 , 2] for exemplary reviews. However, the importance of understanding internal feature rep-resentations extends far beyond interpretability. As one specific example, the feature space allows 

> Preprint.
> arXiv:2605.11203v1 [cs.LG] 11 May 2026

Figure 1: Schematic overview of FeatMap: For a given input image, we apply a specific image manipulation (geometric/photometric, local masking or semantic) and extract corresponding feature maps from a given pretrained vision backbone model (ConvNeXt, SwinV2). We devise different models to learn a mapping from the original to the feature map of the manipulated image. The learned mapping is evaluated in two ways: (1) reconstruction quality, assessed using cosine similarity in feature space as well as SSIM and LPIPS between the manipulated image and its reconstruction. The reconstruction from feature space to image space is performed using FeatInv [ 4] and (2) semantic consistency, measured via output class probabilities. us to investigate robustness and symmetry properties of deep neural networks and how they evolve across layers. Unfortunately, a direct understanding of the feature space is often hampered by the fact that the feature space cannot be directly interpreted. One particularly powerful approach to make them interpretable is to reverse from feature space back to input space, i.e., to reconstruct or visualize inputs from feature representations [3, 4]. Despite these advances, the geometric structure of intermediate feature representations in deep vision models remains largely unresolved. A prominent hypothesis in representation learning is the linear representation hypothesis [ 5], which posits that high-level concepts are encoded as linear directions in activation space. Most concept discovery methods are linear [ 6–10 ] and often characterize concepts as single dimensions in feature space. More general accounts characterize multi-dimensional linear subspaces [ 11 ], convex combinations of prototypical features [ 12 ] up to low-dimensional manifolds [ 13 , 14 ]. While the latter is most general concept definition, it does not answer the question of the true underlying geometry of the feature space. A fundamental understanding of feature space geometry remains absent, but direct experimental probes are challenging to design. Prior work largely relies only on sanity checks (e.g., measuring similarity between adjacent layers [ 13 ]). We approach this target indirectly from an experimental perspective and phrase the research question as follows: For a given manipulation in input space, can we understand its effect on the feature space? Specifically, given a transformation applied to an input image, can we learn a mapping from the original feature map to the feature map of the manipulated image? If yes, what kinds of mappings are required and what are their characteristics? To probe the feature space from multiple angles, we examine three broad categories of input manipu-lations. The first category includes geometric and photometric transformations, such as rotations, mirroring, Gaussian noise, and color shifts. The second category consists of local masking, in which fixed rectangular regions of the image are occluded with a solid color. The third and most novel category is semantic manipulation via generative image editing. In this category, we use a prompted diffusion-based editing model to alter the scene’s high-level visual attributes such as changing body or rim color, removing structural parts, or adding lights. We argue that high-quality generative models 2enable highly nontrivial semantic manipulations that go beyond classical transformations and offer new ways to probe the structure of feature space in otherwise inaccessible areas. 

Contributions We provide the following technical contributions: 1. We devise a diverse set of manipulations (details and examples in App. A) and apply them to two datasets from different image domains [ 15 , 16 ] to investigate their impact on the feature maps of ConvNeXt and Swin Vision transformer, as representatives for the two predominant architectures of vision encoders. 2. We demonstrate the feasibility of learning mappings from original feature maps to manipu-lated feature maps using a diverse set of mapping models with different characteristics (see Figs. 2, 8), both in terms of metrics for reconstruction quality (see Figs. 3, 10) but also for the semantic quality (see Fig. 4) of the representations. Most notably, we show that a shared linear model operating on single feature vectors is sufficient to achieve this goal (when operating on an appropriately reordered set of features for certain geometric transformation), in particular in higher layers with only small performance degradations compared to more complex models, even for highly non-trivial semantic manipulations. 3. We provide insights into the characteristics of the discovered mappings (see Sec. 4.4) and present implications for the geometry of the feature space (see Sec. 5.1). 

2 Related work 

Other feature mapping approaches Recent work has shown that image reconstruction from vision encoder features is feasible for a wide range of ViT-based models, including CLIP, SigLIP, MetaCLIP, InternViT, and SAM, and that reconstruction quality improves with higher input resolution [ 17 ]. Latest research on sparse autoencoders (SAEs) for vision-language models shows that SAEs can recover hierarchical semantic features. Bhalla et al. [14] suggest that many latent concepts are organized as low-dimensional manifolds rather than isolated linear directions. Allakhverdov et al. [17] propose that controlled feature space manipulations can induce predictable pixel-level effects, such as color changes and channel suppression. Our work generalizes these results by including a much larger set of transformations including most notably semantic manipulation. A demonstration that the mapping is possible yields stronger statements and additional insights into the properties of the feature space. While recent literature identifies these geometric structures through latent analysis, our work provides a causal proof of their functional significance by showing how they can be directly steered to manifest specific semantic changes in image space. 

Common assumptions on feature space geometry The linear representation hypothesis [ 5]suggests that high-level semantic concepts are encoded as linear directions or subspaces within a neural network’s activation space. This idea is supported by early empirical evidence from word embedding models, in which linear vector arithmetic captures semantic relationships, such as analogies between concepts [ 18 ]. In the vision domain, concept-based XAI methods have directly operationalized this hypothesis: TCAV (Testing with Concept Activation Vector) [ 6 ] derives CAVs (Concept Activation Vectors) by fitting a linear classifier in activation space to separate concept-exemplar images from random counterexamples. The resulting decision boundary normal serves as the concept direction. CRAFT [ 7 ] extends this approach by recursively factorizing feature maps into interpretable concept subspaces. The consistent success of these methods, which assume the linear separability of concepts in activation space, provides indirect yet substantial evidence for the linear representation hypothesis in vision models. Trager et al. [19] provide a geometric and probabilistic framework for compositional linear structure in VLM embeddings, showing that representations can be approximated as linear combinations of a compact set of factor-specific “ideal word” vectors. Further empirical support comes from Wang et al. [20] , who observe that deep networks are remarkably good at linearizing features, such that semantic transformations correspond to directions in feature space, and exploit this property for data augmentation. MCD [ 11 ] extended the concept definition to multidimensional linear subspaces, discovered via sparse subspace clustering. Also sparse autoencoders learn overcomplete dictionaries composed of linear combinations of features [ 8– 10 ] and therefore also leverage a linear concept definition. However, more recent works emphasize different interpretations, stressing that representations should be seen as organized as convex combinations of prototype-like features [ 12 ] or as forming low-dimensional 3manifolds [ 14 ]. The latter aligns with the manifold-based concept definition in [ 13 ], operationalized via UMAP dimensionality reduction and HDBSCAN density-based clustering, proposed in the context of more finegrained alignment measures. However, none of these methods provide insights into the geometry of the feature space. 

3 Methods 

Manipulations We consider three broad categories of input manipulation. The first category includes geometric and photometric transformations, such as rotations, mirroring, noise, and color shifts. The second category includes local masking, in which spatially fixed rectangular regions are occluded with a solid color. The third category encompasses semantic manipulations, which modify the high-level visual attributes of the scene through prompted generative image editing. Semantic manipulations were executed using Qwen-Image-Edit-2511 [ 21 ]. Details on the semantic manipulations can be found in Appendix A.3. 

3.1 Considered mappings Overview We examine mappings of varying complexity, ranging from linear to nonlinear and from local to global. The linear mapping parametrizes a shared linear mapping operating on a single feature vector and serves as a local baseline. The mlp adds a single hidden layer to investigate the impact non-linearity while maintaining a local model. The cnn extends the former by using a CNN applied to the entire feature map instead of just single feature vectors, while still remaining relatively local due to the finite receptive field of the CNN. Finally, the transformer mapping parametrizes a non-linear and non-local mapping by means of a four stacked transformer layers applied to the entire flattened feature map, allowing it to capture long-range spatial dependencies. Table 1 summarizes all architectures and their key hyperparameters. The training objective minimizes a weighted combination of feature -space mean squared error (MSE) and a cosine similarity loss, where the latter first computes cosine similarities at each spatial location, takes their median value per sample to improve robustness to outliers, and then averages these median values across the batch. Through empirical evaluation based on reconstruction metrics on a subset of the full data, we found that the relative weights λMSE = 0 .3 and λCOS = 0 .7 provided the best trade -off between reconstruction fidelity and feature alignment. 

Transformations modifying the global composition For geometric transformations that affect the global composition of the image (mirroring and rotation), we reordered the feature vectors in order to reflect the global composition of the feature space after applying the transformation. This renders the prediction problem solvable for the case of local transformations, as it aligns the target feature vector with the corresponding relevant input feature vector. After this reordering, the prediction task reduces to learning the local transformation of each feature vector under the geometric operation, since the spatial alignment ensures that the target feature vector is aligned with the relevant input feature vector at the same spatial position. We illustrate the procedure in Figure 7 in the appendix. Table 1: Mapping architectures, implementation identifiers, and key hyperparameters. Input/output dimensions match the feature dimension (128,128), ..., (1024,1024) of the feature layer under consideration in both backbone models. 

model_type Key hyperparameters 

linear Optional spatial transform (rotation/mirror) 

mlp 1 hidden layer (512), ReLU, dropout=0.2 

cnn 2 Conv layers (3×3), hidden=512, BatchNorm, ReLU, Dropout2d=0.2 

transformer 4 layers, 8 heads, hidden=512, input/output projections, dropout=0.1 

3.2 Metrics 

We evaluate our findings by analyzing both post-reconstruction mapping quality and by showing that semantic fidelity is retained after applying the mappings. For reconstruction, we compute the median cosine similarity (MdnCS) between original and mapped feature vectors. To address the limitation 4of global metrics for small, localized manipulations we utilize binary masks to isolate localized manipulations from global spatial maps and then compute the MdnCS on those regions. To assess visual reconstruction quality, we employ the Learned Perceptual Image Patch Similarity (LPIPS) and Structural Similarity Index Measure (SSIM) to measure perceptual alignment and structural preservation between reconstructed and target images [ 22 , 23 ]. Finally, we quantify semantic fidelity by measuring the impact of mappings on a downstream classifier (frozen ConvNeXt and SwinV2 backbones). We report Top-1 accuracy, Top-1 prediction agreement, and the Jensen–Shannon diver-gence (JSD) between probability distributions to evaluate the preservation of categorical information. Full mathematical definitions and implementation details are provided in App. F. 

3.3 Experimental setup Dataset We use the Stanford Cars Dataset [ 15 ], a fine-grained recognition benchmark comprising 16,185 images spanning 196 classes, with the data split approximately in half for training and testing (8,144 images for training and 8,041 for testing). Classes are defined by make, model, and year. The dataset includes a variety of vehicle types and is well-suited for our purposes for several reasons. First, the categories are fine-grained, distinguishing visually similar car models that differ only in subtle appearance details. This ensures that the feature representations encode semantically meaningful and discriminative information, making the feature space worth exploring. Second, it is straightforward to design meaningful semantic transformation, which can be validated without specific domain expertise. We conduct additional experiments using the CUB-200-2011 dataset [ 16 ] consisting of 11,788 images over 200 classes. Classes are defined by the specific bird subspecies. 

Backbones We use ConvNeXt [ 24 ] and the Swin Transformer V2 [ 25 ] as backbone models, initializing them with their official pretrained ImageNet weights 1. These two architectures are chosen to represent two prominent and complementary design paradigms, convolutional and transformer-based, allowing us to assess whether findings generalize across architectural designs. Both models are strong, general-purpose backbones that have demonstrated state-of-the-art performance on a wide range of vision tasks [26]. 

Assessing the semantic retainment Recent discussions in the field of self-supervised learning [ 27 ]emphasized that features suitable for reconstruction do not necessarily coincide with features suitable for semantic tasks. We therefore also assess the semantic quality of the mapped features as compared to the original features by means of a finetuned downstream classifier. To evaluate the semantic quality of the learned mappings using a downstream classifier, we finetune both backbones on Stanford Cars for the 196 available classes. We freeze all weights in the backbone model and update only the weights of the linear classification head, to preserve the original feature representations and the compatibility with the FeatInv reconstruction. For each of the backbones we train two variants: One for 30 epochs on the original training set alone, and another for 15 epochs on the significantly larger combined set (original + augmented data), which converges much faster due to its scale. This not only boosts classifier robustness [ 28 ][ 29 ]but ensures fair mapping comparisons by standardizing evaluation across original and manipulated features. We train all models using the AdamW optimizer with a CosineAnnealingWarmRestarts scheduler, employing cross-entropy loss with label smoothing. The full finetuning setup is outlined in Table 3 in the appendix. 

Leveraging features extracted at different layers For ConvNeXt, we extract representations at different stages throughout the models to assess how transformations affect different layers in the architecture. Features are extracted from the four available ConvNeXt stages before the final pooling layer. The shapes of the corresponding feature maps vary from 128 × 72 × 72 to 1024 × 9 × 9 in the final layer before pooling, see SectionD for details. In the case of SwinV2, we only consider the last feature map before the pooling layer for feature extraction. SwinV2 utilized in this work, uses a larger image size of 384 × 384 resulting also in a larger feature shape of 1024 × 12 × 12 . We used normalized feature vectors as input for earlier layers and unnormalized feature vectors for the last layer, where normalization significantly degraded the reconstruction quality, see App. H.2 for details. 

> 1timm model weights: convnext_base.fb_in22k_ft_in1k, swinv2_base_window12to24_192to384_22kft1k

54 Results ConvNeXt                                               

> feat0
> Linear
> Grayscale
> 0.44 | 0.23
> Transformer
> 0.43 | 0.13
> feat1
> Linear
> 0.12 | 0.87
> Transformer
> 0.03 | 0.96
> feat2
> Linear
> 0.26 | 0.67
> Transformer
> 0.09 | 0.91
> feat3
> Linear
> 0.11 | 0.86
> Transformer
> 0.13 | 0.85
> SwinV2
> feat3
> Linear
> 0.15 | 0.80
> Transformer
> 0.16 | 0.83
> Target Original
> Hue Shift
> +60°
> 0.29 | 0.59 0.02 | 0.97 0.17 | 0.79 0.02 | 0.97 0.24 | 0.73 0.07 | 0.93 0.10 | 0.89 0.13 | 0.82 0.14 | 0.80 0.17 | 0.79
> Center Mask
> Big Square
> 0.37 | 0.37 0.23 | 0.51 0.33 | 0.39 0.20 | 0.60 0.50 | 0.32 0.19 | 0.60 0.21 | 0.49 0.16 | 0.82 0.27 | 0.46 0.30 | 0.58
> Turn On
> Headlights
> 0.43 | 0.57 0.16 | 0.86 0.34 | 0.76 0.15 | 0.89 0.31 | 0.81 0.19 | 0.85 0.26 | 0.84 0.29 | 0.82 0.29 | 0.84 0.42 | 0.82
> Body Color
> Blue
> 0.41 | 0.46 0.27 | 0.64 0.35 | 0.51 0.29 | 0.63 0.28 | 0.78 0.21 | 0.76 0.26 | 0.80 0.30 | 0.82 0.21 | 0.83 0.21 | 0.87
> Tire Rim Color
> Red
> 0.40 | 0.48 0.15 | 0.83 0.26 | 0.67 0.13 | 0.90 0.26 | 0.75 0.17 | 0.78 0.22 | 0.87 0.27 | 0.86 0.23 | 0.66 0.32 | 0.62
> Selection of mapping results from each manipulation group
> Metrics: LPIPS | Masked Median CosSim

Figure 2: Example mapped and reconstructed images for selected manipulation types. They were created using features from both ConvNeXt and SwinV2 stages. For each image the LPIPS and masked median MdnCS metrics between target image and mapped, reconstructed image are shown. 

4.1 Mapped samples 

Fig. 2 shows the mapped and reconstructed samples for the selected manipulations that span all three categories: color and photometric changes (grayscale and hue shift), local masking (large center square), and semantic edits (body and rim color changes and headlight changes). We present results for both the linear and transformer mapping models across all four ConvNeXt feature stages, as well as the last SwinV2 stage. For each reconstructed image, we report LPIPS and masked MdnCS to quantify reconstruction fidelity relative to the target manipulation. In most cases, the mappings successfully capture the intended transformation across all manipulation types. Even the simple linear model that operates on individual feature vectors, produces recognizable reconstructions that reflect the target manipulation. However, there is some loss in perceptual detail, particularly at the early feature stages. Notably, reconstruction quality improves with feature depth for ConvNeXt; features from later stages (feat2 and feat3) consistently produce higher masked MdnCS and lower LPIPS than features from earlier stages (feat0). This indicates that deeper representations are easier to map. The SwinV2 backbone achieves results comparable to those of the feat3 ConvNeXt model, consistent with both operating at a similar level of semantic abstraction. Experiments on the CUB-200-2011 dataset in Figs. 8 and 9 show consistent patterns: photometric and geometric manipulations are reliable, while masking and semantic manipulations are feasible but more dependent on image conditions. Additional examples of geometric transformations (rotations and mirroring) and the full set of manipulations are provided in Figs. 13, 14, and 15 in the appendix. 

4.2 Post-reconstruction mapping quality 

Fig. 3 summarizes the reconstruction metrics for all manipulation types for the Stanford Cars dataset. A fundamental observation is that the linear model is highly dependent on feature depth. There is a substantial improvement in performance from feat0 to feat3 across all metrics. In the case of non-linear models (MLP, CNN, transformer), the relationship between feature depth and mapping quality is less pronounced. The progression across subsequent stages does not exhibit a consistent upward trend. The performance enhancements resulting from feat1 are found to be inconsistent, with subsequent stages demonstrating stagnation or even slight regressions, depending on the specific metric and model configuration. 6Figure 3: Impact of ConvNeXt feature depth on post-reconstruction mapping performance for the Stanford Cars dataset, where each boxplot aggregates results across all manipulation types and compares the performance of the linear, MLP, CNN, and Transformer mapping models. Regarding the choice of mapping model, the transformer model achieves the overall best performance across all metrics and feature stages. However, despite operating on individual feature vectors without any cross-spatial interaction, the linear model achieves competitive results, especially in the final feature stage. The MLP offers marginal improvements over the linear model, while the CNN, leveraging spatial context through its convolutional receptive field, generally outperforms both the linear and MLP models, narrowing the gap to the transformer further. Per-manipulation breakdowns for each feature stage are provided in the appendix (Figs.20–23), reporting LPIPS and MdnCS for all individual input manipulations. The reconstruction quality across both models is largely identical supporting the generality of our findings, see App. H.4. 

4.3 Semantic quality 0.00    

> 0.25
> 0.50
> 0.75
> 1.00
> Accuracy
> feat3 – Top-1 Accuracy
> 0.00
> 0.25
> 0.50
> 0.75
> 1.00
> Agreement
> feat3 – Top-1 Agreement with Original
> Semantic Editing Photometric Masking Geometry
> Group
> 0.0
> 0.2
> 0.4
> JSD
> feat3 – JSD vs Original
> Augmented test
> Linear
> MLP
> CNN
> Transformer
> Original baseline

Figure 4: ConvNeXt classification performance on Stanford Cars, measured by Top-1 accuracy, agreement, and JSD. The dashed line indicates performance on the unmodified test set. Fig. 17 shows Top-1 and Top-5 accuracy for both backbones on the original and augmented Stanford Cars datasets. Fine-tuning only on the original training set yields a Top-1 accuracy of 0.74. Adding augmented data slightly reduces performance on the original test set but improves accuracy on all augmented test sets, with the largest gains for out-of-distribution transforma-tions, especially global geometric ones. Both backbones perform similarly when trained on the same data, suggesting that performance dif-ferences are driven more by training data than by architecture. Building on these image-level results, we evaluate the feature classification of the same image samples in Fig. 4. Since this classification was performed directly on the fea-tures and therefore did not require reconstruc-tion with FeatInv, the full test set was used. The augmented test data corresponds to features ex-tracted from the augmented test images, which serve as the target representations for the map-ping models. Overall, both Top-1 accuracy and agreement performance remain largely stable across semantic, photometric, and masking manipulations. The largest performance gap is observed for geometric transformations. 

4.4 Properties of parametrized mappings Bias analysis As first analysis, we compare the weighted inputs W x to the bias term. The input dominance ratio remains consistently above 0.99, indicating that the output is strongly dominated by the weight contribution. Similarly, the MdnCS between W x and W x + b is consistently above 0.9992, suggesting that the bias has negligible effect on the output direction, see Sec. H.6 for details. 7Overall, both magnitude and directional analyses indicate that the learned mappings are primarily governed by W x , with only minor contributions from the bias term. As a result, no clear separation between manipulation groups is observed in these metrics. While the bias term has minimal influence on the model output in all settings, we observe non-trivial differences in bias magnitude across backbone architectures. In particular, SwinV2 and ConvNeXt models exhibit systematically different bias norms, ranging from 0.6 to 1.4 over different manipulation groups. This indicates that although the bias does not meaningfully affect the output due to the dominance of the Wx term, it is still used differently across architectures at the parameter level. The corresponding SVD analysis for the SwinV2 backbone is shown in Fig 19 in the appendix. A small number of early ranks hold substantially larger singular values that decay rapidly with increasing rank. 

SVD analysis Fig. 5 shows further analysis of the linear mapping models us-ing singular value decomposition (SVD) of the weight matrices for the last feature layer before the classifier across image manipulations for the ConvNeXt backbone. 0 200 400 600 800 1000       

> Rank
> 0
> 1
> 2
> 3
> 4
> 5
> 6
> Singular Value
> Spectrum — convnext
> Semantic Editing Photometric Masking Geometry
> Manipulation Group
> 5.4
> 5.6
> 5.8
> 6.0
> 6.2
> 6.4
> Spectral Entropy
> Spectral Entropy by Group — convnext
> Semantic Editing Photometric Masking Geometry

Figure 5: Structural complexity and spectral decay of the final ConvNeXt layer across manipulations. Top: singular value energy; bottom: spectral en-tropy. Mapping models trained with the ConvNeXt reach overall higher peak Singular Values at early ranks compared to SwinV2 trained mod-els. Across all models and backbones the spec-tral entropies exceed 5.4, indicating that the sin-gular values are spread over a broad range of feature dimensions. In contrast, the spectral entropies varies widely, ranging from approx-imately 5.4 to 6.5, with several outliers. No-tably both ConvNeXt and SwinV2 show the 

Mirror h manipulation as the highest spectral entropy point, where all other geometric trans-formations exhibit spectral entropies below 5.8. Additional analysis of all feature depths and for the Swinv2 backbone are shown in the appendix in Fig. 19. Later stages (feat2/feat3) exhibit broader spreads across manipulation groups, indicating diverse subspace activations for ab-stract/semantic content. This depth progression mirrors reconstruction quality gains for the lin-ear models we see in Figs. 2 and 3. 

5 Discussion 

5.1 Findings and Implications Local mapping models The fact that the local mappings (linear, mlp, cnn) are able to perform all manipulations supports concept definitions in concept-based XAI, which identify geometric structures underlying single feature vectors rather than combinations thereof or entire feature maps. It is important to stress that the ability to solve semantic transformations requires to identify semantic concepts in the respective feature spaces (e.g. livery of the car, rims, side mirrors) in order to selectively apply transformations only to selected feature vectors. Similarly, the local masking operations, which effectively remove parts of an image, are difficult to implement in local mapping models without explicit positional information, such as positional encodings. In absence of such information, the mapping models must instead rely on semantic cues in the image, which are often correlated with particular spatial locations, to decide where the masking should be applied in their feature space. However, in architectures such as SwinV2, positional information may already be implicitly encoded within the feature vectors themselves, potentially allowing local mapping models to leverage spatial cues. This might explain why linear mapping models performed better for masking manipulations using SwinV2 features over ConvNeXt features as seen in Fig. 16. Geometric transformations such as mirroring or rotation can only be performed by means of appropriate 8reordering of the feature vectors in the feature map. In all feature layers, geometric transformations can be learned via local mappings, implementing the effect of mirroring/rotation on a single superpixel. 

Linear mapping models Interestingly, among the class of local mappings, there is no qualitative difference between non-linear and linear mappings. In particular, even semantic transformations can be implemented as local, linear transformations. As seen in the SVD analysis of the weight matrices, none of the mappings are realized as pure rotations but involve scaling. If we assume that human-interpretable concepts underlying the transformations (tires, mirrors, headlights) are reflected by geometric substructures in the models’ representations, the semantic transformations should parametrize mappings that leave these substructures intact. A linear transformation with scaling components is hard to reconcile with bounded geometric structures such as a convex body but most consistent with linear objects such as linear or affine subspaces. The analysis of the bias as compared to the weight component reveals that the mappings are dominated by the weight contribution, which, by the same argument, speaks against affine subspaces as geometric substructures. This leaves linear subspaces as most promising candidates for geometric substructures within feature spaces. 

Linear subspace structure A classic result in the study of word embeddings is that semantic relationships can often be approximated by simple additive offsets in vector space, as illustrated by the well-known analogy king − man + woman ≈ queen [30 ]. In a related vein, Trager et al. [19] show that composite concept embeddings in vision-language models such as CLIP are well-approximated as additive combinations of a smaller set of factor-specific “ideal word” vectors. While these results suggest that meaningful structure in representation spaces can be captured by additive components, our analyses of the layer-to-layer mappings indicate a different picture: the transformations are not well-described as pure translations. Bias metrics show Wx dominance, and SVD confirms non-trivial scaling in the weight matrix rather than a bias-driven shift. This scaling is particularly pronounced in the last layer before the classifier, where singular values concentrate most heavily in early ranks. These findings are more consistent with a linear subspace (or rather an affine subspace structure in earlier layers due to feature normalization before the mapping model) organization than with a simple additive offset structure: concept transformations correspond to rotations and scalings within a subspace rather than rigid translations through the space. The fact that singular values deviate significantly from one is hard to reconcile with bounded concept definitions. 

Layer-dependence The improvements in reconstruction performance of the linear mapping with increasing depth of the feature layer can be seen as a measure for the degree of linearity that substructures in these layers show. At least in the final layer, only linear structures can be exploited by the linear classifier on top of it. More expressive (non-linear) mapping models show a less pronounced layer dependence of the reconstruction quality, indicating that structures in earlier layers are only to a first approximation linear but require non-linear corrections. 

Architectural generality A comparison of ConvNeXt and SwinV2 reveals moderate, manipulation-dependent differences but no qualitative divergence in key findings. Both architectures allow for local, linear mappings for all manipulation categories at their deepest feature stage. This suggests that the observed geometric regularity does not result from either convolutional or attention-based inductive biases, but rather reflects a property of the feature space. 

5.2 Limitations 

We investigate two models representative of CNNs and ViTs, two widely studied architecture families. Future work should disentangle the effects of architecture and training strategy. Photometric, geometric, and masking transformations are straightforward to apply with our methods, whereas semantic manipulations depend strongly on the image samples themselves. Image editing models helped, but sometimes produced incomplete samples or outputs deviating substantially from the original object. Finding universally applicable semantic manipulations for CUB-200-2011 is difficult due to its diverse scenery and bird poses. Reconstruction metrics are generally effective but can be overly optimistic: masked MdnCS may still report high similarity despite partial semantic changes, likely because cosine similarity is less sensitive to fine-grained differences in early layers. This does not indicate a general limitation of ConvNeXt representations, since mappings succeed in later layers. It remains unclear whether the effect comes from the mapping, the FeatInv model, or their interaction. 9Despite using only 1,000 training and 300 test samples per semantic manipulation, and 100 samples per reconstruction setting, the results were stable and qualitatively unchanged at larger scale. 

5.3 Broader impact 

This work provides hints on the geometry of feature representations of deep neural networks, which could lead to an improved understanding of information processing in the latter by means of concept-based XAI. We do not see any immediate negative consequences of this work. 

6 Conclusion 

We demonstrate that a wide range of photometric, geometric and semantic image transformations can be realized using simple mappings in feature space, suggesting that representations are structured in approximately linear ways despite their complexity. More generally, this work showcases the use of semantic image editing models for studies of feature representations, which could be extended far beyond this present work. 

References 

[1] Daking Rai, Yilun Zhou, Shi Feng, Abulhair Saparov, and Ziyu Yao. A practical review of mechanistic interpretability for transformer-based language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2407.02646 , 2024. [2] Leonard Bereska and Stratis Gavves. Mechanistic interpretability for AI safety - a review. Transactions on Machine Learning Research , 2024. ISSN 2835-8856. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id= ePUVetPKu6 . Survey Certification, Expert Certification. [3] Florian Bordes, Randall Balestriero, and Pascal Vincent. High fidelity visualization of what your self-supervised representation knows about. Transactions on Machine Learning Research , 2022. ISSN 2835-8856. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=urfWb7VjmL .[4] Nils Neukirch, Johanna Vielhaben, and Nils Strodthoff. Featinv: Spatially resolved mapping from feature space to input space using conditional diffusion models. Transactions on Machine Learning Research ,2025. ISSN 2835-8856. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=UtE1YnPNgZ .[5] Kiho Park, Yo Joong Choe, Yibo Jiang, and Victor Veitch. The geometry of categorical and hierarchical con-cepts in large language models. In The Thirteenth International Conference on Learning Representations ,2025. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=bVTM2QKYuA .[6] Been Kim, Martin Wattenberg, Justin Gilmer, Carrie Cai, James Wexler, Fernanda Viegas, and Rory Sayres. Interpretability beyond feature attribution: Quantitative testing with concept activation vectors (tcav), 2018. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/1711.11279 .[7] Thomas Fel, Agustin Picard, Louis Bethune, Thibaut Boissin, David Vigouroux, Julien Colin, Rémi Cadène, and Thomas Serre. Craft: Concept recursive activation factorization for explainability, 2023. URL 

https://arxiv.org/abs/2211.10154 .[8] Trenton Bricken, Adly Templeton, Joshua Batson, Brian Chen, Adam Jermyn, Tom Conerly, Nick Turner, Cem Anil, Carson Denison, Amanda Askell, Robert Lasenby, Yifan Wu, Shauna Kravec, Nicholas Schiefer, Tim Maxwell, Nicholas Joseph, Zac Hatfield-Dodds, Alex Tamkin, Karina Nguyen, Brayden McLean, Josiah E Burke, Tristan Hume, Shan Carter, Tom Henighan, and Christopher Olah. Towards monosemanticity: Decomposing language models with dictionary learning. Transformer Circuits Thread ,2023. https://transformer-circuits.pub/2023/monosemantic-features/index.html. [9] Robert Huben, Hoagy Cunningham, Logan Riggs Smith, Aidan Ewart, and Lee Sharkey. Sparse autoen-coders find highly interpretable features in language models. In The Twelfth International Conference on Learning Representations , 2024. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=F76bwRSLeK .[10] Thomas Fel, Ekdeep Singh Lubana, Jacob S Prince, Matthew Kowal, Victor Boutin, Isabel Papadimitriou, Binxu Wang, Martin Wattenberg, Demba E Ba, and Talia Konkle. Archetypal sae: Adaptive and stable dictionary learning for concept extraction in large vision models. In Forty-second International Conference on Machine Learning .[11] Johanna Vielhaben, Stefan Blücher, and Nils Strodthoff. Multi-dimensional concept discovery (MCD): A unifying framework with completeness guarantees. Transactions on Machine Learning Research , 2023. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=KxBQPz7HKh .

10 [12] Thomas Fel, Binxu Wang, Michael A. Lepori, Matthew Kowal, Andrew Lee, Randall Balestriero, Sonia Joseph, Ekdeep Singh Lubana, Talia Konkle, Demba E. Ba, and Martin Wattenberg. Into the rabbit hull: From task-relevant concepts in DINO to minkowski geometry. In The Fourteenth International Conference on Learning Representations , 2026. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=pbbRmnFkjG .[13] Johanna Vielhaben, Dilyara Bareeva, Jim Berend, Wojciech Samek, and Nils Strodthoff. Beyond scalars: Concept-based alignment analysis in vision transformers. In The Thirty-ninth Annual Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems , 2025. [14] Usha Bhalla, Thomas Fel, Can Rager, Sheridan Feucht, Tal Haklay, Daniel Wurgaft, Siddharth Boppana, Matthew Kowal, Vasudev Shyam, Jack Merullo, Atticus Geiger, and Ekdeep Singh Lubana. Do sparse autoencoders capture concept manifolds? arXiv preprint 2604.28119 , 2026. URL https://arxiv.org/ abs/2604.28119 .[15] Jonathan Krause, Michael Stark, Jia Deng, and Li Fei-Fei. 3d object representations for fine-grained categorization. In 4th International IEEE Workshop on 3D Representation and Recognition of Riemannian Surfaces (3DPR 2013) , 2013. [16] C. Wah, S. Branson, P. Welinder, P. Perona, and S. Belongie. The caltech-ucsd birds-200-2011 dataset. Technical Report CNS-TR-2011-001, California Institute of Technology, 2011. [17] Eduard Allakhverdov, Dmitrii Tarasov, Elizaveta Goncharova, and Andrey Kuznetsov. Feature inversion as a lens on vision encoders. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Winter Conference on Applications of Computer Vision , pages 3598–3605, 2026. [18] Tomas Mikolov, Kai Chen, Greg Corrado, and Jeffrey Dean. Efficient estimation of word representations in vector space, 2013. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/1301.3781 .[19] Matthew Trager, Pramuditha Perera, Luca Zancato, Alessandro Achille, Parminder Bhatia, and Stefano Soatto. Linear spaces of meanings: Compositional structures in vision-language models, 2024. URL 

https://arxiv.org/abs/2302.14383 .[20] Yulin Wang, Xuran Pan, Shiji Song, Hong Zhang, Cheng Wu, and Gao Huang. Implicit semantic data augmentation for deep networks, 2020. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/1909.12220 .[21] Chenfei Wu, Jiahao Li, Jingren Zhou, Junyang Lin, Kaiyuan Gao, Kun Yan, Sheng ming Yin, Shuai Bai, Xiao Xu, Yilei Chen, Yuxiang Chen, Zecheng Tang, Zekai Zhang, Zhengyi Wang, An Yang, Bowen Yu, Chen Cheng, Dayiheng Liu, Deqing Li, Hang Zhang, Hao Meng, Hu Wei, Jingyuan Ni, Kai Chen, Kuan Cao, Liang Peng, Lin Qu, Minggang Wu, Peng Wang, Shuting Yu, Tingkun Wen, Wensen Feng, Xiaoxiao Xu, Yi Wang, Yichang Zhang, Yongqiang Zhu, Yujia Wu, Yuxuan Cai, and Zenan Liu. Qwen-image technical report. arXiv preprint 2508.02324 , 2025. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2508.02324 .[22] Richard Zhang, Phillip Isola, Alexei A. Efros, Eli Shechtman, and Oliver Wang. The unreasonable effectiveness of deep features as a perceptual metric. CoRR , abs/1801.03924, 2018. URL http://arxiv. org/abs/1801.03924 .[23] Zhou Wang, A.C. Bovik, H.R. Sheikh, and E.P. Simoncelli. Image quality assessment: from error visibility to structural similarity. IEEE Transactions on Image Processing , 13(4):600–612, 2004. doi: 10.1109/TIP.2003.819861. [24] Zhuang Liu, Hanzi Mao, Chao-Yuan Wu, Christoph Feichtenhofer, Trevor Darrell, and Saining Xie. A convnet for the 2020s. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF conference on computer vision and pattern recognition , pages 11976–11986, 2022. [25] Ze Liu, Han Hu, Yutong Lin, Zhuliang Yao, Zhenda Xie, Yixuan Wei, Jia Ning, Yue Cao, Zheng Zhang, Li Dong, Furu Wei, and Baining Guo. Swin transformer v2: Scaling up capacity and resolution, 2022. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2111.09883 .[26] Micah Goldblum, Hossein Souri, Renkun Ni, Manli Shu, Viraj Uday Prabhu, Gowthami Somepalli, Prithvijit Chattopadhyay, Mark Ibrahim, Adrien Bardes, Judy Hoffman, Rama Chellappa, Andrew Gordon Wilson, and Tom Goldstein. Battle of the backbones: A large-scale comparison of pretrained models across computer vision tasks. In Thirty-seventh Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems Datasets and Benchmarks Track , 2023. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=1yOnfDpkVe .[27] Randall Balestriero and Yann Lecun. How learning by reconstruction produces uninformative features for perception. In International Conference on Machine Learning , pages 2566–2585. PMLR, 2024. [28] Dan Hendrycks and Thomas G. Dietterich. Benchmarking neural network robustness to common corrup-tions and perturbations. CoRR , abs/1903.12261, 2019. URL http://arxiv.org/abs/1903.12261 .

11 [29] Chang Liu, Yinpeng Dong, Wenzhao Xiang, Xiao Yang, Hang Su, Jun Zhu, Yuefeng Chen, Yuan He, Hui Xue, and Shibao Zheng. A comprehensive study on robustness of image classification models: Benchmarking and rethinking, 2023. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2302.14301 .[30] Tomas Mikolov, Wen-tau Yih, and Geoffrey Zweig. Linguistic regularities in continuous space word representations. In Lucy Vanderwende, Hal Daumé III, and Katrin Kirchhoff, editors, Proceedings of the 2013 Conference of the North American Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics: Human Language Technologies , pages 746–751, Atlanta, Georgia, June 2013. Association for Computational Linguistics. URL https://aclanthology.org/N13-1090/ .

12 A Details on manipulations 

Figure 6 shows examples of the manipulations, we use in our experiments, applied to the dataset. The following subsections describe each manipulation in more detail. Original resized grayscale hue shift 60 mask big square center mask bottom right square mask small square center           

> mask top left square mirror h mirror v noise 40 rotation 180 rotation 270
> rotation 90 Add police lights Change body color blue Change tire rim color red Remove side mirrors Turn on headlights

Figure 6: Examples of the manipulations applied to the dataset 

A.1 Geometric & Photometric Manipulations 

• Rotation (angles: 90 ◦, 180 ◦, 270 ◦)• Mirroring (horizontal, vertical) • Added Gaussian noise (std deviation: 40) • Color adjustments (hue shift: +60 ◦; grayscale conversion) 

A.2 Local Masking Manipulations 

• Top-left square (polygon: [(26 , 26) , (103 , 26) , (103 , 103) , (26 , 103)] , fill: red [255 , 0, 0] )• Bottom-right square (polygon: [(180 , 180) , (270 , 180) , (270 , 270) , (180 , 270)] , fill: green 

[0 , 255 , 0] )• Large center square (polygon: [(90 , 90) , (193 , 90) , (193 , 193) , (90 , 193)] , fill: blue 

[0 , 0, 255] )• Small center square (polygon: [(116 , 116) , (154 , 116) , (154 , 154) , (116 , 154)] , fill: yellow 

[255 , 255 , 0] )

A.3 Semantic Manipulations via prompted image editing 

Using Qwen/Qwen-Image-Edit-2511 [ 21 ], N = 10 images/class, 10 inference steps, true_cfg=4.5, seed=42 • Stanford Cars: – Color change: “Change the car’s body color to bright blue, while maintaining the exact same lighting, reflections, background, and all other details.” 

– Mirror removal: “Remove the car’s side mirrors in a realistic photo style, while keeping the car’s body, lighting, reflections, and background identical.” 

– Headlights on: “Turn on the car’s headlights so they appear bright and illuminated, while preserving the car’s position, lighting, color, and all background details exactly as in the original image.” 

– Police lights: “Add flashing blue and red police lights to the top of the car, making them appear illuminated, while keeping the car’s color, lighting, reflections, position, and all background details exactly the same.” 

– Rim color change: “Change the car’s tire rim color to red in a realistic photo style, while keeping the car’s body, lighting, reflections, and background identical.” 13 • CUB-200-2011: – Change plumage color blue: “Change only the birds plumage color to bright blue, without altering the birds species, pose, head orientation, body shape, texture, or expression. Keep the original background, lighting, shadows, camera angle, and image composition exactly the same.” 

– Open beak: “Edit the bird to show its beak open in a calling or singing posture, while preserving the exact species, head direction, body pose, and limb positions. Do not change the background, lighting, camera angle, or any other element except the mouth/beak opening.” 

– Preening wing: “Show the bird gently preening one wing, in the same pose and background, without changing species or plumage.” 

B Note on the datasets 

In our work, we used the Stanford Cars dataset [ 15 ] and the CUB_200_2011 dataset [ 16 ], which cover a wide range of car types and bird species, respectively. Neither dataset is distributed under a clearly stated open license in the original source. The dataset authors indicate that use is permitted with appropriate attribution, and the CUB_200_2011 dataset is additionally restricted to non-commercial research and educational use. Stanford Cars is no longer available from its original source but is distributed through third-party implementations such as torchvision. 

C Reorderings for mirroring and rotation 

In Figure 7, we illustrate the methodology of reordering feature vectors for the case of rota-tion/mirroring, which modify the global composition of the image. We reorder feature -vector positions to enable local mappings for rotation and mirroring. First, we permute the spatial locations of the feature vectors according to the chosen geometric transformation, without modifying the feature values themselves. Then, a mapping model is applied to each feature vector individually to learn the local effect of the same transformation on the features. 

Figure 7: Example how geometric transformations are realized by first reordering feature-vector positions and then applying the local mappings. 

D Feature extraction at different stages 

Features are extracted from either the four available ConvNeXt stages before the final pooling layer or when using Swin, following the same procedure used by FeatInv for reconstruction [ 4]. Both models are loaded from the timm library with pretrained ImageNet-22k/1k weights. Input images are normalized using standard ImageNet statistics. This enables direct compatibility between extracted features and subsequent feature space analysis or visualization. As long as the mapping models do not alter the dimensions of the features, the manipulated features can then be passed for reconstruction to the FeatInv model. Note that these feature maps are spatially large (up to 128 × 72 × 72 = 663 ,552 

activations per image at layer 0), posing significant memory and computational challenges for mapping models. 14 Table 2: Feature dimensions from the different Backbone stages Backbone Input Images Layer depth Feature dimensions ConvNeXt 288 × 288 × 3 0 128 × 72 × 72 

1 256 × 36 × 36 

2 512 × 18 × 18 

3 1024 × 9 × 9

SwinV2 384 × 384 × 3 3 1024 × 12 × 12 

E Details on finetuning the ConvNeXt and SwinV2 classification heads 

Table 3 presents all configurations we used for finetuning the backbone classifiers for the Stanford Cars dataset. Table 3: Finetune setup for the ConvNeXt and SwinV2 classifier on Stanford Cars.                 

> Component Configuration
> Backbones convnext_base.fb_in22k_ft_in1k swinv2_base_window12to24_192to384_22kft1k
> Frozen stages All backbone stages Trainable parameters Classifier head only ( head.fc ,head.norm )Optimizer AdamW, weight_decay=0.01
> Learning rate 1e-3 LR scheduler Cosine annealing warm-restarts Label smoothing 0.1 Dropout rate 0.3 Epochs 30 (original train), 15 (original + augmented train) Batch size 128 Training augmentation RandAugment , random horizontal flip, random resized crop Validation 5% stratified split Validation transform Resize/CenterCrop to 288 (ConvNeXt) / 384 (SwinV2)

F Further details on the metrics 

Reconstruction: Median Cosine-similarity in feature space Cosine similarity is defined in equation 1 where ˆF1,h,w and ˆF2,h,w are the two feature vectors and h,w the indices in the spatial feature map. MdnCS is then computed as median (sh,w ) either across the entire feature map or within manipulation-specific masked regions. To address the limitation of global metrics for small, localized manipulations, binary masks are generated from pixel-wise differences between original and manipulated images (resized and Gaussian-smoothed, with Euclidean distances thresholded at 50) and downsampled via any-pooling over H × W cells to the feature-map resolution. H and W

here are the spatial dimensions of each feature map. MdnCS is computed only within the masked spatial regions to enable more accurate evaluation of localized changes. 

sh,w = ˆF1,h,w · ˆF2,h,w 

max( ∥ ˆF1,h,w ∥2∥ ˆF2,h,w ∥2, ϵ ) (1) 

Reconstruction: Perceptual and Structural Similarity Perceptual similarity between the recon-structed and target images is measured via the learned perceptual image patch similarity (LPIPS) [ 22 ], using the AlexNet backbone, which calculates the distance between the images internal feature representations to better capture human-aligned quality. The LPIPS metric is calculated with the formula in 2. Here ˆfl are the normalized feature maps for the chosen layer l.

LP IP S (x, y ) = X

> l

wl|| ˆfl(x) − ˆfl(y)|| 22 (2) Additionally we use the structural similarity index (SSIM) [ 23 ] to evaluate preservation of local luminance, contrast, and structural patterns. Here μx and μy are the average luminance of the two 15 images, σ2 

> x

and σ2 

> y

are variances of pixel intensities, σxy is the covariance of pixel intensities and C1

and C2 are constants to prevent division by zero. 

SSIM (x, y ) = (2 μxμy + C1)(2 σxy + C2)(μ2 

> x

+ μ2 

> y

+ C1)( σ2 

> x

+ σ2 

> y

+ C2) (3) 

Semantic quality: Impact on downstream classifier Semantic fidelity is assessed using a down-stream classifier with frozen ConvNeXt and SwinV2 backbones finetuned on the 196 Stanford Cars classes. We report the classification accuracy of the mapped representations, the fraction of samples for which the Top-1 prediction coincides with that of the manipulated input and the Jensen–Shannon divergence (JSD) between original and tested classification probability distributions. JSD between classification probability distributions P and Q is defined as JSD (P ∥Q) = 12 DKL (P ∥M ) + 12 DKL (Q∥M ), M = P + Q

2 (4) where DKL denotes the Kullback-Leibler divergence and M is the mixture distribution. 

G Information about compute resources 

All experiments were conducted on a Linux-based cluster utilizing NVIDIA L40 GPUs. Dataset augmentation using the Qwen-Image-Edit model required a multi-GPU setup, as the model footprint (weights and activation overhead) reaches approximately 57 GB; consequently, we utilized two L40 GPUs (each with 48 GB VRAM) to enable stable inference via accelerate model sharding (device_map="balanced"). This configuration achieved an inference speed of approximately 30 seconds per image. Training mapping models and performing feature extraction were executed on single L40 GPUs, with individual training runs ranging from few minutes to hours depending mainly on the selected model architecture and feature depth. Training mapping models for the earliest ConvNeXt especially with the transformer model requires additional time. On one L40 GPU each application of a mapping model, reconstructing to image space with FeatInv and then calculating the evaluation metrics requires approximately 5 seconds per sample. Due to the large amount of manipulation and backbone combinations and the size of the feature dimensions 1.6 TB of storage space was required. 

H Additional results 

H.1 Validation of our methods with the CUB_200_2011 birds dataset 

We conducted additional experiments on the CUB-200-2011 birds dataset [ 16 ] to evaluate how well our methods generalize to a different image domain. Figures 8 and 9 show representative post-reconstruction mapping results across the tested mapping models and manipulation types. Overall, we observe trends similar to those seen on the Stanford Cars dataset: photometric and geometric manipulations transfer reliably, while masking remains comparatively more challenging. Applying semantic manipulations in this setting introduces additional complexity due to the wide variability in bird species and the presence of varied and detailed backgrounds. Among the evaluated operations, plumage color modification proved to be the most consistent, although it still depends on accurate localization of relevant object regions; in most cases, sensitive areas such as the beak and eyes were appropriately preserved. Other semantic manipulations showed more variability in their outcomes, which can be attributed in part to factors such as partial object visibility. Furthermore, semantic manipulations in this domain are inherently more open-ended and less tightly defined than the corresponding target attributes, which makes direct comparison to the targets generated by the Qwen image editing model less straightforward. 

H.2 Effect of Feature Normalization 

During preliminary experiments, we observed that feature normalization substantially changes mapping outcomes across all tested mapping architectures. In our pipeline, features are first optionally normalized before being passed to the mapping model, and the predicted features are subsequently 16 Grayscale                                        

> Original
> Hue Shift
> +60° Noise 40
> Center Mask
> Big Square
> Bottom Right
> Mask
> Center Mask
> Small Square
> Top Left
> Mask
> Plumage Color
> Blue Open beak Preening Wing
> Target
> ConvNeXt
> feat3
> Linear
> 0.14 | 0.82 0.27 | 0.00 0.16 | 0.86 0.20 | 0.50 0.20 | 0.64 0.23 | 0.78 0.17 | 0.72 0.18 | 0.69 0.15 | 0.51 0.29 | 0.22
> ConvNeXt
> feat3
> MLP
> 0.18 | 0.78 0.36 | 0.00 0.19 | 0.91 0.27 | 0.69 0.29 | 0.56 0.29 | 0.68 0.24 | 0.67 0.26 | 0.71 0.15 | 0.47 0.32 | 0.28
> ConvNeXt
> feat3
> CNN
> 0.37 | 0.64 0.42 | 0.00 0.35 | 0.82 0.30 | 0.49 0.38 | 0.53 0.39 | 0.63 0.34 | 0.71 0.54 | 0.29 0.60 | 0.28 0.41 | 0.31
> ConvNeXt
> feat3
> Transformer
> 0.14 | 0.83 0.34 | 0.00 0.20 | 0.87 0.20 | 0.76 0.21 | 0.71 0.24 | 0.88 0.17 | 0.87 0.30 | 0.57 0.15 | 0.34 0.45 | 0.30
> Selection of mapping results from each manipulation group
> LPIPS | Masked Median CosSim

Figure 8: Example mapped and reconstructed images for selected manipulation types. They were created using the last feature stage from ConvNeXt. For each image the LPIPS and masked median MdnCS metrics between target image and mapped, reconstructed image are shown. denormalized prior to feature-to-image reconstruction. This ensures that reconstruction with FeatInv operates in the original feature space. Figure 11 shows the differences in mapping metrics between original and normalized features. In particular, normalization tends to reduce reconstruction fidelity, likely because it removes magnitude information that is important for accurately recovering image structure. This observation is consistent with Allakhverdov et al. [17] , who note that normalization suppresses magnitude cues, although they still adopt normalized features in their approach when applying linear mappings on features. Given the substantial impact on reconstruction quality we used unnormalized features for training mapping models for the last feature stages of ConvNeXt and SwinV2. During our experiments we also observed that training with unnormalized features was unstable for the earlier feature stages of ConvNeXt, making it necessary to use normalized features. In extreme cases unnormalized features resulted in distorted, wavy patterns as shown in figure 12. For all earlier layers, normalization was therefore necessary to ensure stable training. 

H.3 Mapped samples 

In figure 13 we present additonal examples from mapped and reconstructed images for selected geometric manipulations. For comparison also included are samples where just the spatial feature permutations were performed without any mapping models. When the spatial feature permutations are applied generally all tested models are then able to apply the local mapping to the feature vectors. The transformer model is able to apply the geometric manipulation though with clear degradation in image quality and a loss in structure of the cars. Notably the transformer mappings on the SwinV2 samples show higher degrees of image degradation and loss of most car features. Of the tested geometric transformations, only horizontal mirroring could be achieved using spatial feature permutations alone, without noticeable loss in quality. Figure 14 shows more examples of manipulation and model combinations on the same original image for comparison using features extracted from the last ConvNeXt layer feat3. Color transformations 

grayscale and hue shift are shown to be possible with all mapping models. While all models applied were able to apply noise to the image, the target noise strength was not fully reached. Local masking proved to be challenging for the local-only mapping models, while the CNN and Transformer models were able able to apply the masking with occasional loss in exact mask shape and color. Figure 15 shows more examples of semantic manipulation and model combinations on the same original image for comparison using features extracted from the last ConvNeXt layer feat3. The 17 ConvNeXt 

> feat3
> linear
> Applied TF

Rotation 

90° 

> 0.13 | 0.86
> transformer
> Applied TF
> 0.17 | 0.80
> transformer
> Mapping only
> 0.56 | 0.11
> None
> Only applied TF
> 0.23 | 0.51

Target Original 

Rotation 

180°    

> 0.15 | 0.76 0.16 | 0.76 0.53 | 0.10 0.22 | 0.56

Rotation 

270°    

> 0.09 | 0.55 0.11 | 0.67 0.37 | 0.12 0.13 | 0.56

Mirror 

Horizontal    

> 0.19 | 0.65 0.22 | 0.63 0.49 | 0.34 0.09 | 0.81

Mirror 

Vertical    

> 0.20 | 0.54 0.24 | 0.47 0.55 | 0.25 0.28 | 0.40

Selection of mapping results from the geometric transforms group Figure 9: Example mapped and reconstructed images for selected geometric manipulations. They were created using the last feature stage from ConvNeXt. For each image the LPIPS and masked median MdnCS metrics between target image and mapped, reconstructed image are shown. Photometric Masking Geometry Semantic 

> 0.2
> 0.4
> 0.6
> 0.8

LPIPS    

> Photometric Masking Geometry Semantic
> 0.2
> 0.3
> 0.4
> 0.5
> 0.6
> 0.7
> 0.8
> 0.9

SSIM     

> Photometric Masking Geometry Semantic
> 0.0
> 0.2
> 0.4
> 0.6
> 0.8
> 1.0

Masked Median CosSim 

CUB_200_2011 - ConvNeXt - feat3 - Reconstruction Quality    

> Linear MLP CNN Transformer

Figure 10: Reconstruction quality for the different manipulation groups for the CUB_200_2011 dataset. 

Headlights manipulation was succesfully applied by all models with varying degrees of light intensity. Adding police lights proved to be another challenging task highly dependent on the car model and background. Semantic localized coloring manipulations ( Change body color blue ,

Change tire rim color red ) were possible to be applied with all mapping models. The Remove side mirrors manipulation was again highly dependent on the car type, but generally successful in reducing the size or completely removing the side mirrors. 18 cnn 

> linear
> mlp
> transformer
> linear_mirror_h
> linear_mirror_v
> linear_rotation_180
> linear_rotation_270
> linear_rotation_90

Model 

0.5 

0.4 

0.3 

0.2 

0.1 

0.0 

0.1 

> LPIPS_delta

LPIPS_delta 

> cnn
> linear
> mlp
> transformer
> linear_mirror_h
> linear_mirror_v
> linear_rotation_180
> linear_rotation_270
> linear_rotation_90

Model 

0.2 

0.0 

0.2 

0.4 

0.6 

> MEDIAN_COSSIM_delta

MEDIAN_COSSIM_delta 

Model Sensitivity to Normalization (NoNorm - Norm) Figure 11: Effect of feature normalization on image quality for various mapping model architectures for the ConvNeXt feat3 features 

Figure 12: Example for distorted image results when training with unnormalized features in earlier ConvNeXt layers (here feat2) ConvNeXt 

feat3 

linear 

Applied TF 

Rotation 

90° 

0.24 | 0.49 

transformer 

Applied TF 

0.25 | 0.58 

transformer 

Mapping only 

0.53 | 0.21 

None 

Only applied TF 

0.38 | 0.18 

SwinV2 

feat3 

linear 

Applied TF 

0.31 | 0.58 

transformer 

Applied TF 

0.32 | 0.58 

transformer 

Mapping only 

0.62 | 0.09 

None 

Only applied TF 

0.44 | 0.37 

Target Original 

Rotation 

180° 

0.22 | 0.64 0.25 | 0.58 0.55 | 0.27 0.39 | 0.37 0.28 | 0.44 0.34 | 0.46 0.59 | 0.09 0.42 | 0.28 

Rotation 

270° 

0.31 | 0.45 0.33 | 0.38 0.61 | 0.15 0.41 | 0.25 0.34 | 0.36 0.34 | 0.42 0.63 | 0.05 0.40 | 0.29 

Mirror 

Horizontal 

0.05 | 0.95 0.13 | 0.85 0.21 | 0.68 0.06 | 0.94 0.08 | 0.90 0.11 | 0.85 0.38 | 0.53 0.08 | 0.91 

Mirror 

Vertical 

0.19 | 0.65 0.17 | 0.72 0.41 | 0.49 0.28 | 0.51 0.20 | 0.74 0.20 | 0.78 0.54 | 0.19 0.24 | 0.67 

Selection of mapping results from the geometric transforms group 

Figure 13: Example mapped and reconstructed images for selected geometric manipulations. They were created using features from both ConvNeXt and SwinV2 stages. For each image the LPIPS and MdnCSmetrics between target image and mapped, reconstructed image are shown. Applied TF: Reordering of the feature vector possitions is applied, Mapping only: No reordering - just the mapping model is applied 19 Original 

Target: 

grayscale 

Target: 

hue_shift_60 

Target: 

noise_40 

Target: 

mask_big_square_center 

Target: 

mask_bottom_right_square 

Target: 

mask_small_square_center 

Target: 

mask_top_left_square 

linear 

LPIPS:0.24 COS_SIM:0.75 

MASKED_COS_SIM:0.73 

linear 

LPIPS:0.37 COS_SIM:0.65 

MASKED_COS_SIM:0.63 

linear 

LPIPS:0.65 COS_SIM:0.76 

MASKED_COS_SIM:0.72 

linear 

LPIPS:0.35 COS_SIM:0.65 

MASKED_COS_SIM:0.50 

linear 

LPIPS:0.29 COS_SIM:0.65 

MASKED_COS_SIM:0.31 

linear 

LPIPS:0.26 COS_SIM:0.66 

MASKED_COS_SIM:0.29 

linear 

LPIPS:0.35 COS_SIM:0.69 

MASKED_COS_SIM:0.63 

mlp 

LPIPS:0.24 COS_SIM:0.73 

MASKED_COS_SIM:0.69 

mlp 

LPIPS:0.35 COS_SIM:0.70 

MASKED_COS_SIM:0.68 

mlp 

LPIPS:0.64 COS_SIM:0.71 

MASKED_COS_SIM:0.70 

mlp 

LPIPS:0.36 COS_SIM:0.65 

MASKED_COS_SIM:0.54 

mlp 

LPIPS:0.32 COS_SIM:0.64 

MASKED_COS_SIM:0.27 

mlp 

LPIPS:0.30 COS_SIM:0.69 

MASKED_COS_SIM:0.56 

mlp 

LPIPS:0.43 COS_SIM:0.69 

MASKED_COS_SIM:0.65 

cnn 

LPIPS:0.24 COS_SIM:0.76 

MASKED_COS_SIM:0.74 

cnn 

LPIPS:0.39 COS_SIM:0.66 

MASKED_COS_SIM:0.62 

cnn 

LPIPS:0.74 COS_SIM:0.71 

MASKED_COS_SIM:0.70 

cnn 

LPIPS:0.28 COS_SIM:0.64 

MASKED_COS_SIM:0.54 

cnn 

LPIPS:0.33 COS_SIM:0.63 

MASKED_COS_SIM:0.35 

cnn 

LPIPS:0.28 COS_SIM:0.65 

MASKED_COS_SIM:0.55 

cnn 

LPIPS:0.32 COS_SIM:0.70 

MASKED_COS_SIM:0.80 

transformer 

LPIPS:0.25 COS_SIM:0.75 

MASKED_COS_SIM:0.73 

transformer 

LPIPS:0.30 COS_SIM:0.68 

MASKED_COS_SIM:0.65 

transformer 

LPIPS:0.65 COS_SIM:0.77 

MASKED_COS_SIM:0.70 

transformer 

LPIPS:0.23 COS_SIM:0.66 

MASKED_COS_SIM:0.54 

transformer 

LPIPS:0.30 COS_SIM:0.63 

MASKED_COS_SIM:0.37 

transformer 

LPIPS:0.25 COS_SIM:0.70 

MASKED_COS_SIM:0.57 

transformer 

LPIPS:0.29 COS_SIM:0.73 

MASKED_COS_SIM:0.87 

STANFORD_CARS Direct manipulation Examples Figure 14: Example mapped and reconstructed images for each direct manipulation type. They were created using features extracted from the last ConvNeXt layer feat3 before the classification head. For each image the LPIPS, MdnCS and Masked MdnCS metrics between target image and mapped, reconstructed image are shown. Original 

Target: 

Turn_on_headlights 

Target: 

Add_police_lights 

Target: 

Change_body_color_blue 

Target: 

Change_tire_rim_color_red 

Target: 

Remove_side_mirrors 

linear 

LPIPS:0.49 COS_SIM:0.69 

MASKED_COS_SIM:0.69 

linear 

LPIPS:0.49 COS_SIM:0.66 

MASKED_COS_SIM:0.62 

linear 

LPIPS:0.48 COS_SIM:0.64 

MASKED_COS_SIM:0.62 

linear 

LPIPS:0.64 COS_SIM:0.63 

MASKED_COS_SIM:0.62 

linear 

LPIPS:0.48 COS_SIM:0.67 

MASKED_COS_SIM:0.68 

mlp 

LPIPS:0.51 COS_SIM:0.66 

MASKED_COS_SIM:0.64 

mlp 

LPIPS:0.53 COS_SIM:0.61 

MASKED_COS_SIM:0.59 

mlp 

LPIPS:0.49 COS_SIM:0.64 

MASKED_COS_SIM:0.60 

mlp 

LPIPS:0.66 COS_SIM:0.59 

MASKED_COS_SIM:0.58 

mlp 

LPIPS:0.50 COS_SIM:0.60 

MASKED_COS_SIM:0.60 

cnn 

LPIPS:0.56 COS_SIM:0.56 

MASKED_COS_SIM:0.55 

cnn 

LPIPS:0.60 COS_SIM:0.42 

MASKED_COS_SIM:0.38 

cnn 

LPIPS:0.64 COS_SIM:0.43 

MASKED_COS_SIM:0.36 

cnn 

LPIPS:0.70 COS_SIM:0.48 

MASKED_COS_SIM:0.44 

cnn 

LPIPS:0.55 COS_SIM:0.52 

MASKED_COS_SIM:0.48 

transformer 

LPIPS:0.51 COS_SIM:0.69 

MASKED_COS_SIM:0.69 

transformer 

LPIPS:0.52 COS_SIM:0.60 

MASKED_COS_SIM:0.57 

transformer 

LPIPS:0.49 COS_SIM:0.64 

MASKED_COS_SIM:0.61 

transformer 

LPIPS:0.64 COS_SIM:0.62 

MASKED_COS_SIM:0.59 

transformer 

LPIPS:0.49 COS_SIM:0.65 

MASKED_COS_SIM:0.65 

STANFORD_CARS Semantic manipulation Examples 

Figure 15: Example mapped and reconstructed images for each semantic manipulation type. They were created using features extracted from the last ConvNeXt layer feat3 before the classification head. Target images were created using the Qwen image editing model. For each image the LPIPS, MdnCS and masked MdnCS metrics between target image and mapped, reconstructed image are shown. 20 H.4 Comparison of reconstruction quality across vision backbones 

Figure 16 compares the two backbone architectures across manipulation groups. The differences between ConvNeXt and SwinV2 are moderate and vary by method and manipulation type. ConvNeXt tends to perform better with CNN and transformer mapping models, while the linear model shows mixed results. For local masking, SwinV2 occasionally outperforms ConvNeXt with the linear model, likely due to the architectures’ different spatial encoding properties. Overall, the results indicate that the observed trends are largely architecture-agnostic, supporting the generality of our findings. Manipulation Group                                     

> cnn linear mlp transformer
> Method
> 0.10 0.11 0.28
> 0.01 -0.10 -0.05
> 0.04 0.02 0.09
> 0.07 0.07 0.17
> 1-LPIPS
> Manipulation Group
> Method
> 0.11 0.16 0.21
> 0.01 -0.14 -0.01
> 0.02 0.01 0.07
> 0.10 0.11 0.13
> SSIM
> Geometric & Photometric Local Masking Semantic Editing
> Manipulation Group
> cnn linear mlp transformer
> Method
> 0.10 0.16 0.26
> 0.01 -0.16 -0.05
> 0.04 0.03 0.08
> 0.13 0.10 0.13
> Median CosSim
> Geometric & Photometric Local Masking Semantic Editing
> Manipulation Group
> Method
> 0.08 0.06 0.22
> 0.02 -0.02 -0.07
> 0.02 0.06 0.04
> 0.13 0.05 0.09
> Masked Median CosSim
> 0.2
> 0.1
> 0.0
> 0.1
> 0.2
> Metric (ConvNeXt  SwinV2)
> Backbone Comparison Across Manipulation Groups

Figure 16: Backbone comparison across manipulation groups for the four main metrics. Displayed are the differences ∆ between ConvNeXt and SwinV2 samples for each metric. 

H.5 Image classification results on the original and augmented Stanford Cars test set 

Figure 17 shows the image classification results using the finetuned Backbone models with both the original and the augmented Stanford Cars image datasets. It compares how adding augmented training samples improves accuracy for the testset with the tradeoff of a slightly lower accuracy on the original testset. 0.0 

> 0.2
> 0.4
> 0.6
> 0.8
> 1.0
> Accuracy

Top1 Accuracy     

> Original Semantic Editing Photometric Masking Geometry
> Group
> 0.0
> 0.2
> 0.4
> 0.6
> 0.8
> 1.0
> Accuracy

Top5 Accuracy 

STANFORD CARS Image Classification 

> ConvNeXt | Test / Train
> ConvNeXt | Test / Aug. Train
> SwinV2 | Test / Train
> ConvNeXt | Aug. Test / Train
> ConvNeXt | Aug. Test / Aug. Train
> SwinV2 | Aug. Test / Aug. Train

Figure 17: Image classification results using the finetuned Backbone models with both the original and the augmented Stanford Cars image datasets. 

H.6 Bias analysis 

Figure 18 shows comparisons between the weighted inputs W x and the bias term. 21 0.986 

0.988 

0.990 

0.992 

0.994 

0.996 

0.998 

1.000 

> Ratio

A. Input Dominance |Wx| / |Wx+b| 

0.9992 

0.9993 

0.9994 

0.9995 

0.9996 

0.9997 

0.9998 

0.9999 

1.0000 

> Median Cosine Similarity

B. Median Cosine Similarity: Wx vs (Wx+b) 

Geometry Masking Photometric Semantic Editing 

0.6 

0.8 

1.0 

1.2 

1.4 

> L2 Norm

C. Bias Magnitude |b| 

Geometry Masking Photometric Semantic Editing 

0.000 

0.002 

0.004 

0.006 

0.008 

0.010 

0.012 

0.014 

> ( Wx+b  Wx ) /  Wx

D. Relative Bias Shift 

convnext swinv2 Figure 18: Bias dominance metrics across manipulation groups showing magnitude dominance, directional stability, and small relative bias effects. 

H.7 SVD analysis over all feature depths 

Figure 19 shows the SVD analysis over all feature depths of ConvNeXt and for the last feature layer for the SwinV2 backbone. Semantic Editing Photometric Masking Geometry                

> 3.0
> 3.5
> 4.0
> 4.5
> 5.0
> 5.5
> 6.0
> Spectral Entropy
> feat0 (convnext)
> Semantic Editing Photometric Masking Geometry
> feat1 (convnext)
> Semantic Editing Photometric Masking Geometry
> feat2 (convnext)
> Semantic Editing Photometric Masking Geometry
> 5.0
> 5.5
> 6.0
> 6.5
> 7.0
> 7.5
> Spectral Entropy
> feat3 (convnext)
> Semantic Editing Photometric Masking Geometry
> feat3 (swinv2)
> Manipulation Group
> Semantic Editing Photometric Masking Geometry

(a) Distribution of spectral entropy for the different manipulation groups 0 25 50 75 100 125 

0

1

2

3

4

5

6 feat0 

0 50 100 150 200 250 

feat1 

0 100 200 300 400 500 

0

1

2

3

4

5

6 feat2 

0 200 400 600 800 1000 

feat3 

Rank 

> Singular Value (Raw)

Groups 

Semantic Editing 

Photometric 

Masking 

Geometry 

Backbone by Linestyle 

ConvNeXt 

SwinV2 

(b) Singular value energy spectrum as a function of rank 

Figure 19: Comparison of structural complexity and spectral decay across feature representations and image manipulations for the ConvNeXt backbone. 

H.8 Reconstruction quality metrics 

In this subsections we report all post-reconstruction mapping evaluations for each of the tested manipulations for both backbone models. Figures 20 to 23 show the results for experiments with all ConvNeXt feature stages and figure 24 presents the results for features extracted at the last stage before the classifier of the SwinV2 backbone. 22 0.0 

0.1 

0.2 

0.3 

0.4 

0.5 

0.6 

> LPIPS

0.2 

0.4 

0.6 

0.8 

1.0 

> Median CosSim

0.0 

0.2 

0.4 

0.6 

0.8 

1.0 

> Masked Median CosSim
> Add_police_lights
> Change_body_color_blue
> Change_tire_rim_color_red
> Remove_side_mirrors
> Turn_on_headlights
> grayscale
> hue_shift_60
> noise_40
> mask_big_square_center
> mask_bottom_right_square
> mask_small_square_center
> mask_top_left_square

Manipulation 

0.2 

0.4 

0.6 

0.8 

1.0 

> SSIM

convnext | feat0: Image metrics after reconstruction | STANFORD_CARS 

Method 

Linear 

MLP 

CNN 

Transformer Figure 20: Image metrics after reconstruction, Comparison between the target reconstructed edited images and the same image created by the mapping models applied on feat0 ConvNeXt features. 23 0.0 

0.1 

0.2 

0.3 

0.4 

0.5 

0.6 

0.7 

0.8 

> LPIPS

0.3 

0.4 

0.5 

0.6 

0.7 

0.8 

0.9 

1.0 

> Median CosSim

0.0 

0.2 

0.4 

0.6 

0.8 

1.0 

> Masked Median CosSim
> Add_police_lights
> Change_body_color_blue
> Change_tire_rim_color_red
> Remove_side_mirrors
> Turn_on_headlights
> grayscale
> hue_shift_60
> noise_40
> mask_big_square_center
> mask_bottom_right_square
> mask_small_square_center
> mask_top_left_square

Manipulation 

0.2 

0.3 

0.4 

0.5 

0.6 

0.7 

0.8 

0.9 

1.0 

> SSIM

convnext | feat1: Image metrics after reconstruction | STANFORD_CARS 

Method 

Linear 

MLP 

CNN 

Transformer Figure 21: Image metrics after reconstruction, Comparison between the target reconstructed edited images and the same image created by the mapping models applied on feat1 ConvNeXt features. 24 0.0 

0.1 

0.2 

0.3 

0.4 

0.5 

0.6 

0.7 

> LPIPS

0.2 

0.4 

0.6 

0.8 

1.0 

> Median CosSim

0.0 

0.2 

0.4 

0.6 

0.8 

1.0 

> Masked Median CosSim
> Add_police_lights
> Change_body_color_blue
> Change_tire_rim_color_red
> Remove_side_mirrors
> Turn_on_headlights
> grayscale
> hue_shift_60
> noise_40
> mask_big_square_center
> mask_bottom_right_square
> mask_small_square_center
> mask_top_left_square

Manipulation 

0.3 

0.4 

0.5 

0.6 

0.7 

0.8 

0.9 

> SSIM

convnext | feat2: Image metrics after reconstruction | STANFORD_CARS 

Method 

Linear 

MLP 

CNN 

Transformer Figure 22: Image metrics after reconstruction, Comparison between the target reconstructed edited images and the same image created by the mapping models applied on feat2 ConvNeXt features. 25 0.1 

0.2 

0.3 

0.4 

0.5 

0.6 

0.7 

> LPIPS

0.0 

0.2 

0.4 

0.6 

0.8 

1.0 

> Median CosSim

0.0 

0.2 

0.4 

0.6 

0.8 

1.0 

> Masked Median CosSim
> Add_police_lights
> Change_body_color_blue
> Change_tire_rim_color_red
> Remove_side_mirrors
> Turn_on_headlights
> grayscale
> hue_shift_60
> noise_40
> mask_big_square_center
> mask_bottom_right_square
> mask_small_square_center
> mask_top_left_square
> rotation_90
> rotation_90 (Applied TF)
> rotation_180
> rotation_180 (Applied TF)
> rotation_270
> rotation_270 (Applied TF)
> mirror_h
> mirror_h (Applied TF)
> mirror_v
> mirror_v (Applied TF)

Manipulation 

0.2 

0.3 

0.4 

0.5 

0.6 

0.7 

0.8 

0.9 

> SSIM

convnext | feat3: Image metrics after reconstruction | STANFORD_CARS 

Method 

Linear 

MLP 

CNN 

Transformer Figure 23: Image metrics after reconstruction, Comparison between the target reconstructed edited images and the same image created by the mapping models applied on feat3 ConvNeXt features. 26 0.1 

0.2 

0.3 

0.4 

0.5 

0.6 

0.7 

> LPIPS

0.0 

0.2 

0.4 

0.6 

0.8 

1.0 

> Median CosSim

0.0 

0.2 

0.4 

0.6 

0.8 

1.0 

> Masked Median CosSim
> Add_police_lights
> Change_body_color_blue
> Change_tire_rim_color_red
> Remove_side_mirrors
> Turn_on_headlights
> grayscale
> hue_shift_60
> noise_40
> mask_big_square_center
> mask_bottom_right_square
> mask_small_square_center
> mask_top_left_square
> rotation_90
> rotation_90 (Applied TF)
> rotation_180
> rotation_180 (Applied TF)
> rotation_270
> rotation_270 (Applied TF)
> mirror_h
> mirror_h (Applied TF)
> mirror_v
> mirror_v (Applied TF)

Manipulation 

0.1 

0.2 

0.3 

0.4 

0.5 

0.6 

0.7 

0.8 

0.9 

> SSIM

swinv2: Image metrics after reconstruction | STANFORD_CARS 

Method 

Linear 

MLP 

CNN 

Transformer Figure 24: Image metrics after reconstruction, Comparison between the target reconstructed edited images and the same image created by the mapping models applied on features extracted at the last stage before the classifier of the SwinV2 backbone. 27