Title: Adversarial LassoNet: Robust Feature Selection via Stability-Driven Sparse Learning

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2607.03839v1

Published Time: Tue, 07 Jul 2026 02:09:30 GMT

Number of Pages: 10

Markdown Content:
# Adversarial LassoNet: Robust Feature Selection via Stability-Driven Sparse Learning 

## Zhen Huang †, Peicheng Xu †, Junbiao Pang *, Yulong Zheng, Yuan Chen 

## Beijing University of Technology, The First Affiliated Hospital of Zhejiang University School of Medicine, Peking University First Hospital, 

> †

## Equal contribution. *Corresponding author. huangzhen@emails.bjut.edu.cn, pcxu45635@gmail.com, junbiao pang@bjut.edu.cn, 1507138@zju.edu.cn, softsnake@bjmu.edu.cn 

## Abstract 

Sparse feature selection is critical for high-dimensional machine learning, yet traditional ℓ1-regularized methods are often brittle under obser-vational noise and spurious correlations, leading to unstable feature supports and degraded gener-alization. Although adversarial training has been widely used to improve model robustness, its in-teraction with hierarchical sparse feature selection remains underexplored. In this work, we pro-pose Adversarial LassoNet (AdLNet), a stability-driven sparse feature selection framework that in-tegrates input-space adversarial perturbations with the hierarchical sparsity mechanism of LassoNet. We derive a tractable first-order adversarial ap-proximation under local smoothness assumptions and provide an NTK-inspired spectral analysis to characterize how perturbation-driven training can reduce gradient concentration. Experiments on high-dimensional SERS data, six public bench-mark datasets, and ColoredMNIST show that AdL-Net maintains competitive sparse-selection perfor-mance while improving out-of-distribution robust-ness by 4.4% and feature support reproducibil-ity by 6.3% under nearly matched support spar-sity on ColoredMNIST. On the high-dimensional lung cancer screening dataset, AdLNet achieves a 5.3% test accuracy gain and a 6.0% AUC im-provement over vanilla LassoNet. Code and dataset are available at https://github.com/719573/ Adversarial-LassoNet. 

## 1 Introduction 

Feature selection is a fundamental task in machine learn-ing, particularly in high-dimensional settings where redun-dant or noisy variables can substantially degrade predictive performance and generalization Guyon and Elisseeff [2003]; Lemhadri et al. [2021]. Selecting a compact feature set is es-pecially important when the number of input variables is large and the available sample size is limited Brahim Belhaouari et al. [2023]. Feature selection remains challenging in realistic settings characterized by observational noise, data heterogeneity, and spurious correlations. These issues are closely related to shortcut learning and dataset shift, where models tend to exploit correlations that do not transfer to deployment set-tings Geirhos et al. [2020]; Brown et al. [2023]; Glocker et al. [2021]. In such settings, some variables may appear pre-dictive because they capture spurious patterns in the training data Arjovsky et al. [2019]; Sagawa et al. [2020a]; Madry et al. [2018]. As a result, sparse models optimized only for em-pirical prediction may select features that fit the training dis-tribution but are unstable under perturbations or distribution shifts. These limitations motivate feature selection methods that are not only predictive, but also stable and robust to spu-rious correlations. To address these limitations, we propose Adversarial Las-soNet (AdLNet), a stability-driven sparse feature selection framework that integrates local input perturbations into the hierarchical sparsity mechanism of LassoNet. The key idea is to use local adversarial sensitivity as an additional training signal for sparse feature selection. Features that are predictive mainly due to spurious correlations may be more sensitive to local input perturbations, whereas more stable predictive fea-tures tend to preserve their contribution under small worst-case input changes. By combining the clean prediction loss with a perturbation-driven stability loss, AdLNet encourages the selected feature subset to be both predictive and locally stable. Importantly, the proposed method preserves the origi-nal hierarchical sparse optimization structure of LassoNet and modifies only the training objective through an adversarial stability term. Our main contributions are threefold: • We propose Adversarial LassoNet (AdLNet), a stability-driven extension of LassoNet that integrates input-space adversarial perturbations into hierarchical sparse feature selection. The proposed objective encourages selected features to be both predictive on clean samples and sta-ble under local worst-case perturbations. • We derive a tractable first-order approximation for local adversarial sensitivity under a local smoothness assump-tion and incorporate it into the hierarchical proximal op-timization pipeline. We further provide an NTK-inspired spectral analysis showing that perturbation-driven train-ing can increase the empirical NTK effective rank when a local spectral growth condition is satisfied. 

> arXiv:2607.03839v1 [cs.LG] 4 Jul 2026

• We conduct experiments on high-dimensional SERS data, six public benchmark datasets, and ColoredM-NIST. The results show that AdLNet maintains com-petitive sparse-selection performance while improving out-of-distribution robustness and feature support repro-ducibility under spurious correlation shifts. 

## 2 Related Work 

2.1 Sparse Feature Selection and Stability 

Conventional feature selection methods often rely on data-driven ℓ1 regularization. For example, LASSO identifies salient variables by imposing an ℓ1 penalty on model coeffi-cients [Tibshirani, 1996], while subsequent extensions intro-duce structural constraints to model prior correlations among features [Meier et al. , 2008]. Building on these linear founda-tions, recent deep sparse models enable representation learn-ing and feature selection to be performed jointly. LassoNet [Lemhadri et al. , 2021], for instance, embeds a global feature selection mechanism into neural network training through hierarchical sparsity constraints. However, these ℓ1-based paradigms are primarily optimized for in-distribution predic-tive accuracy, and the stability of the selected features may therefore degrade under distribution shifts. To improve the stability of sparse selection, several robust optimization techniques have been explored. In linear set-tings, Adversarial Lasso [Li et al. , 2021] integrates adver-sarial training with ℓ1 regularization and uses perturbation constraints to stabilize feature selection. However, its linear formulation limits its applicability to high-dimensional prob-lems with complex nonlinear dependencies. In deep learn-ing, methods such as Robust Sparse Deep Feature Selection [Yang et al. , 2023] reduce model sensitivity by penalizing input-gradient magnitudes. Although such penalties can im-prove stability to some extent, they are typically isotropic magnitude-based regularizers and may not fully exploit the directional information provided by worst-case perturbations for stable feature selection. 

2.2 Perturbation-Based Robustness 

Beyond explicit feature selection, perturbation-based learn-ing has become an important paradigm for improving model robustness. Techniques such as adversarial training [Good-fellow et al. , 2015], input-gradient regularization [Ross and Doshi-Velez, 2018; Madry et al. , 2018], and Sharpness-Aware Minimization (SAM) [Foret et al. , 2021] encourage local consistency under perturbations and favor flatter, less perturbation-sensitive loss landscapes. Recently, sharpness-aware optimization has also been extended to sparse training; for example, single-step SAM variants have been used to im-prove the efficiency and accuracy of sparse network training [Ji et al. , 2024]. Perturbation-based robustness is particularly relevant in medical AI, where models are often expected to remain reliable under noise, distribution shifts, and spurious correlations [Finlayson et al. , 2019; Han et al. , 2021]. Nevertheless, many perturbation-based methods primarily target predictor robustness or parameter-level sparsity, such as network pruning, rather than input-level variable selection. As a result, improved robustness of the predictor does not necessarily imply that the selected feature support is concise, interpretable, or reproducible. Although our use of local per-turbations is conceptually related to counterfactual explana-tions [Wachter et al. , 2018], the goal of our method is differ-ent: we use local perturbations as a training signal to guide stable sparse feature selection, rather than to generate coun-terfactual samples or make causal intervention claims. 

## 3 Adversarial LassoNet 

3.1 Revisiting LassoNet 

We consider a supervised classification problem with a train-ing set D = {(xi, y i)}Ni=1 , where xi ∈ Rd denotes the input feature vector and yi ∈ { 1, . . . , C } denotes the correspond-ing class label. The objective is to learn a predictor and a sparse subset of informative features that preserve predictive performance. LassoNet Lemhadri et al. [2021] combines a nonlinear neural network branch with a linear skip connection from the input to the output. Specifically, the prediction function is formulated as: 

fθ (x) = θ⊤x + fW(x) (1) where θ ∈ Rd×C denotes the weight matrix of the linear skip connection, and fW(x) represents a nonlinear feedforward neural network parameterized by W. To impose structured feature sparsity, LassoNet introduces a group-sparsity regu-larization penalty during the joint optimization of the empiri-cal loss L, while imposing a hierarchical proximal constraint. The core optimization problem can be precisely formulated as the operator HierProx ηλ, M in LassoNet: 

min  

> θ,W

L(θ, W) + λ

> d

X

> j=1

∥θj ∥2

s.t. ∥W(1)  

> j

∥∞ ≤ M ∥θj ∥2, j = 1 , 2, . . . , d. 

(2) where λ is the regularization parameter controlling the level of sparsity, W(1)  

> j

denotes the weight vector connecting the j-th input feature to the first hidden layer of the network, and M > 0 is a hyperparameter that governs the relative strength of the linear and nonlinear components. The ℓ∞ con-straint ensures a strict hierarchical relationship: an input fea-ture is allowed to possess non-zero weights in the nonlinear branch only if its corresponding linear representative remains active. Consequently, LassoNet integrates feature selection directly into end-to-end network training, performing strictly structured feature sparsification while learning nonlinear rep-resentations. LassoNet in Eq. (2) performs feature selection based solely on empirical predictive performance. However, in high-dimensional yet small-sample regimes, such correlation-driven selection tends to prioritize spurious features that cap-ture incidental correlations in the training distribution. A rea-sonable assumption is that some spurious features are sensi-tive to minor input perturbations, yielding unstable and non-reproducible sparse feature supports. To resolve this limita-tion, we propose a stability-driven method that encourages se-lected features to be both predictive and robust against worst-case local perturbations. 3.2 Adversarial Perturbation for Stability 

We introduce the concept of adversarial sensitivity to explic-itly measure and subsequently suppress feature instability. The adversarial sensitivity is defined for each sample-label pair (x, y ) as follows: 

Sρ(x, y ; θ) := max  

> ∥r∥p≤ρ

[L(fθ (x + r), y ) − L (fθ (x), y )] , (3) where ρ > 0 is the perturbation radius, ∥ · ∥ p denotes the vec-tor p-norm, and r ∈ Rd denotes a bounded local perturbation. Eq. (3) follows the perturbation-based robustness perspective in adversarial training, where worst-case local input pertur-bations quantify model sensitivity Goodfellow et al. [2015]; Madry et al. [2018]; Ross and Doshi-Velez [2018]. A large value of Sρ(x, y ; θ) indicates that the prediction at x is highly sensitive to small worst-case perturbations. In our framework, we operationalize this stability by deriving the worst-case perturbation r∗, which acts as a stability-aware training signal to guide the sparsity to prune unstable features. Since solving the exact inner maximization in Eq. (3) can be computationally expensive, we approximate it using a local first-order expansion. Note that we focus on the ℓ2-bounded case, namely p =2. Extensions to other norms follow from the corresponding dual-norm formulation. 

Assumption 1. For fixed (θ, y ), we define the per-example loss ℓ(x) := L(fθ (x), y ). We assume that ℓ(x) is differen-tiable in a neighborhood of x and that its input gradient is locally Lipschitz. Formally, there exists a constant Lx > 0

such that for all perturbations r satisfying ∥r∥2 ≤ ρ,

∥∇ xℓ(x + r) − ∇ xℓ(x)∥2 ≤ Lx∥r∥2. (4) Assumption 1 is well-justified for neural networks Good-fellow et al. [2015]. Modern activation functions (e.g., ReLU, GELU, sigmoid) are Lipschitz continuous, and their layered composition yields locally Lipschitz input gradients. Un-der the bounded perturbation constraint ∥r∥2 ≤ ρ, input x

stays within a compact neighborhood, where the loss gradi-ent maintains uniform smoothness. Given Assumption 1, the local adversarial sensitivity in Eq.(3) admits the first-order approximation as follows: 

Sρ(x, y ; θ) = max 

> ∥r∥2≤ρ

⟨∇ xℓ(x), r⟩ + O(ρ2). (5) By the Cauchy–Schwarz inequality, the linearized inner maximization in Eq. (5) yields both the worst-case local loss increase and the perturbation direction that attains it. Specifi-cally, to maximize the inner product, the optimal perturbation 

r∗ must align with the direction of the input gradient: 

max 

> ∥r∥2≤ρ

⟨∇ xℓ(x), r⟩ = ρ∥∇ xℓ(x)∥2,

r∗ = ρ ∇xℓ(x)

∥∇ xℓ(x)∥2

, if ∇xℓ(x)̸ = 0 .

(6) In implementation, we use the stabilized form 

r∗ = ρ ∇xℓ(x)

∥∇ xℓ(x)∥2 + ϵ ,

where ϵ > 0 is a small numerical constant introduced for stability. A detailed proof is provided in Appendix A. The worst-case perturbation r∗ provides a critical stability signal that can be seamlessly integrated into the feature se-lection mechanism. By embedding this perturbation into the training loop, the framework is explicitly guided to preferen-tially prune unstable features, encouraging the selected subset to retain features whose predictive contribution is more stable under local perturbations. 

3.3 Stability-Driven Objective and Optimization 

We build a unified stability-driven training objective and pre-serve the original hierarchical sparse optimization pipeline of LassoNet. We replace the standard ERM loss with the fol-lowing mixed objective: 

Lmix = (1 − α) L(fθ (x), y )

| {z }

> predictive fidelity

+α L(fθ (x + r∗), y )

| {z }

> adversarial stability

, (7) where α ∈ [0 , 1] controls the balance between clean predic-tive fidelity and local adversarial stability. Eq. (7) encourages the selection of features that support accurate clean predic-tion and remain stable under worst-case local perturbations. Rather than modifying the structural sparsification mecha-nism of LassoNet, our method retains the original hierarchi-cal proximal scheme Lemhadri et al. [2021] and refines the training signal. Sparse feature selection is therefore shaped indirectly through stability-aware optimization, rather than through a separate feature-wise stability score. 

Optimization: The resulting objective is both non-convex and non-smooth because it combines a deep neural parame-terization with the hierarchical sparsity-inducing regulariza-tion inherited from LassoNet. We optimize it by alternat-ing between adversarial perturbation construction in the in-put space and hierarchical proximal updates in the parame-ter space. Concretely, for each mini-batch, we first compute the input-gradient-based perturbation in Eq. (6). During the outer parameter update, r∗ is treated as a fixed perturbation constructed from the current mini-batch, following standard first-order adversarial training practice. We then evaluate the mixed objective (7) on clean and perturbed samples, and ap-ply the standard gradient and hierarchical proximal updates. The overall procedure is summarized in Algorithm 1. 

3.4 A Local Spectral Condition to Increase Effective Rank 

The stability-driven objective in Eq. (7), optimized by Al-gorithm 1, is designed to improve the stability of selected feature supports by incorporating local adversarial perturba-tions into sparse learning. However, the geometric mech-anism behind this stability-driven training effect remains to be characterized. To provide such an interpretation, we turn to the empirical Neural Tangent Kernel (NTK) Jacot et al. 

[2018], which captures the similarity of parameter gradients across training samples. Under a local first-order perturba-tion model, we analyze how adversarial perturbations can af-fect the spectral distribution of the empirical NTK. In partic-ular, we show that the effective rank of the NTK can increase Algorithm 1 Stability-driven optimization for LassoNet 

Input: Training data D, perturbation radius ρ, mixing coeffi-cient α, learning rate η, path regularization parameter λ,hierarchy parameter M , and numerical constant ϵ 

> 1:

Initialize model parameters θ 

> 2:

for each sparsity level λ along the regularization path do  

> 3:

for each mini-batch {(xi, y i)}Bi=1 do  

> 4:

Construct perturbations r∗ 

> i

from Eq. (6)  

> 5:

Form perturbed inputs xadv  

> i

= xi + r∗ 

> i
> 6:

Compute the perturbed loss L(fθ (xadv  

> i

), y i) 

> 7:

Compute mixed loss Lmix from Eq. (7)  

> 8:

Take a gradient step on the regularized objective  

> 9:

Apply the hierarchical proximal operator 

HierProx ηλ,M  

> 10:

end for  

> 11:

end for  

> 12:

return sparse feature support and trained predictor when the perturbation-induced spectral correction satisfies a positive local growth condition, corresponding to a less con-centrated empirical gradient geometry. Let Θ ∈ RN ×N denote a non-vanishing symmetric posi-tive semi-definite empirical NTK. We define its effective rank as 

reff (Θ) = tr( Θ)2

∥Θ∥2

> F

. (8) where tr( Θ) is the sum of its eigenvalues, and ∥Θ∥2 

> F

equals the sum of squared eigenvalues. The ratio tr( Θ)2/∥Θ∥2

> F

quantifies the uniformity of eigenvalue distribution: it reaches the true rank when eigenvalues are perfectly equal, and de-creases as eigenvalue concentration grows. Therefore, the metric in Eq. (8) quantifies the intrinsic dimension of a ma-trix through the uniformity of its eigenvalue distribution and is widely adopted in the analysis of overparameterized mod-els Bartlett et al. [2020]. For perturbed inputs, we assume the empirical NTK admits a local first-order Taylor expansion around the clean kernel 

Θ:

eΘ(ρ) = Θ + ρE + R(ρ),

where ∥R(ρ)∥F = o(ρ), (9) with E being a symmetric first-order correction matrix, R(ρ)

denoting the higher-order residual term of the Taylor ex-pansion, and o(ρ) representing the little-o notation. We as-sume eΘ(ρ) ⪰ 0 holds for sufficiently small ρ > 0, and let ⟨A, B⟩ = tr( A⊤B) denote the Frobenius inner product throughout. 

Lemma 2. Under the above conditions, the effective rank of the perturbed NTK admits the following first-order Taylor expansion with respect to ρ:

reff ( eΘ(ρ)) = reff (Θ)+2 reff (Θ)

 tr( E)tr( Θ) − ⟨Θ, E⟩∥Θ∥2

> F

| {z }

> G(E;Θ)

ρ+o(ρ).

(10) The term tr( E)/ tr( Θ) in (10) measures the trace-normalized spectral mass added by the perturbation, whereas 

⟨Θ, E⟩/∥Θ∥2 

> F

measures how strongly the correction aligns with the energy already concentrated in the clean NTK. Thus, the effective rank increases when the perturbation contributes relatively more mass to weak or underrepresented directions than to the dominant kernel directions. Lemma 2 shows that the first-order variation of the effec-tive rank is governed by G(E; Θ), which we refer to as the spectral growth score. 

Proposition 3 (Local condition for effective-rank increase) .

If 

G(E; Θ) > 0,

then there exists ρ0 > 0 such that for all 0 < ρ < ρ 0,

reff ( eΘ(ρ)) > r eff (Θ).

Proof. From Lemma 2, the change in effective rank is given by 

∆reff = 2 reff (Θ)G(E; Θ)ρ + o(ρ). (11) Since reff (Θ) > 0 for a non-vanishing NTK, the condition 

G(E; Θ) > 0 implies the linear coefficient is strictly posi-tive. By the definition of the little-o notation, the linear term strictly dominates the remainder o(ρ) for a sufficiently small 

ρ > 0, guaranteeing reff ( eΘ(ρ)) > r eff (Θ).The theoretical condition G(E; Θ) > 0 derived above pro-vides a local mechanism for effective-rank elevation. Inter-ested readers may refer to Appendix B for details. 

## 4 Experiments 

4.1 Experimental Setup 

Datasets. We conduct experiments on three groups of datasets: the Surface-Enhanced Raman Spectroscopy (SERS) lung cancer screening dataset, six public benchmark datasets, and the ColoredMNIST benchmark. • SERS lung cancer screening dataset. The SERS dataset is used to evaluate sparse feature selection in a high-dimensional medical classification scenario. It contains 87 samples, including 47 positive and 40 neg-ative cases, and each sample consists of 1,264 spectral variables. The dataset is randomly split into training, validation, and test sets with a ratio of 70%/10%/20%. This setting is consistent with recent Raman spec-troscopy studies, where machine-learning models are used to classify disease-related spectra and identify di-agnostically informative spectral patterns Kothari et al. 

[2021]; Conti et al. [2023]. All spectral variables are standardized using the statistics of the training set. • Public benchmark datasets. We further evaluate pre-dictive performance on six widely used public bench-mark datasets, including MNIST LeCun et al. [1998], MNIST-Fashion Xiao et al. [2017], ISOLET Fanty and Cole [1991], COIL-20 Nene et al. [1996], Activity An-guita et al. [2013], and Mice Protein Higuera et al. 

[2015]. These datasets cover image recognition, speech recognition, human activity recognition, and biological classification tasks, providing diverse feature distribu-tions and data complexities for evaluating sparse feature selection. For image datasets, pixel values are normal-ized to [0 , 1] ; for non-image datasets, continuous fea-tures are standardized using training-set statistics. • ColoredMNIST benchmark. To evaluate robustness under spurious correlation shifts, we adopt ColoredM-NIST Sagawa et al. [2020b], a controlled benchmark in which color is spuriously correlated with class la-bels. Following standard protocols, the training envi-ronments are constructed with color-label correlations of {0.1, 0.2, 0.3}, and the shifted test environment is used to evaluate out-of-distribution robustness and fea-ture support reproducibility. 

Experimental settings. All experiments are implemented in PyTorch 1.8.0 with CUDA 11.1 and conducted on a work-station equipped with an Intel(R) i7-7700 CPU @ 3.60GHz, 32 GB RAM, and an NVIDIA GeForce RTX 3080 GPU. All models are trained from scratch without pretraining. We use stochastic gradient descent (SGD) with momentum 0.9, and the learning rate is set to 10 −3. Batch sizes are selected according to dataset scale, ranging from 128 to 512 . The network configurations and training epochs follow the cor-responding baseline settings. Unless otherwise specified, ex-periments are repeated over five independent random seeds. Vanilla LassoNet Lemhadri et al. [2021] is used as the pri-mary baseline because it shares the same hierarchical sparsity mechanism as AdLNet but does not include adversarial stabil-ity regularization. Therefore, the comparison between AdL-Net and vanilla LassoNet directly reflects the effect of the proposed stability-driven objective. On the six public bench-mark datasets, we further compare with FISTA-Net Xiang et al. [2021] and Deep-Lasso Cherepanova et al. [2023], which represent optimization-driven sparse learning and gradient-regularized deep feature selection, respectively. For the six public benchmark datasets, all methods are evaluated under the matched sparse feature budget of k =50 following the original LassoNet regularization-path pro-tocol [Lemhadri et al. , 2021]. Specifically, we vary the sparsity regularization parameter λ and report the result at the checkpoint satisfying the target feature budget. For the SERS dataset, the main result is reported under the constraint 

nselected < 300 to retain sufficient spectral coverage for med-ical classification, and an additional controlled sparse-budget analysis is conducted to examine the influence of feature-count differences. For ColoredMNIST, methods are com-pared under nearly matched support sparsity, so that robust-ness and reproducibility improvements cannot be attributed to selecting more features. The adversarial mixing coefficient α controls the trade-off between predictive fidelity and perturbation-driven stability. To avoid data leakage, α is selected using a validation-only protocol. The candidate values are {0, 0.2, 0.4, 0.6, 0.8, 1.0}

and are evaluated only on the validation set. The model checkpoint with the best validation accuracy is then evalu-ated on the held-out test set. Other key hyperparameters, including the hierarchy parameter M and the sparsity regu-larization path, are selected using the same validation proto-col. For AdLNet, adversarial perturbations are generated us-ing the first-order approximation derived in Section 3.2, and optimization follows Algorithm 1. 

Evaluation Metrics. We evaluate the proposed method from three complementary perspectives: predictive perfor-mance, robustness and support reproducibility under distri-bution shift, and optimization-geometry diagnostics. For the six public benchmark datasets, we report classifi-cation accuracy under the matched sparse feature budget. For the SERS medical dataset, we additionally report Sensitiv-ity (Sens), Specificity (Spec), and area under the ROC curve (AUC), which provide a more comprehensive evaluation of binary medical classification performance. For ColoredMNIST, we report in-distribution (ID) accu-racy, out-of-distribution (OOD) accuracy, and the ID–OOD generalization gap to assess robustness under spurious corre-lation shifts. Feature support reproducibility is quantified us-ing the Jaccard index across independent runs, measuring the consistency of selected feature subsets under different ran-dom initializations. For training-dynamics analysis, we compute empirical NTK effective rank, dominant eigenvalue ratio, spectral en-ergy concentration, and Hessian curvature statistics. These metrics are used as diagnostic evidence to examine whether stability-driven training reduces spectral concentration and sharp curvature in sparse learning. Detailed metric definitions and calculation procedures are provided in Appendix C. 

4.2 Predictive Performance under Sparse Feature Selection 

We first evaluate whether the proposed stability-driven ob-jective can preserve predictive performance under sparse fea-ture selection. This evaluation is conducted on the high-dimensional SERS medical dataset and six public benchmark datasets. The SERS experiment examines the behavior of AdLNet in a small-sample, high-dimensional regime, while the public benchmark experiments further test whether the method remains effective across diverse data domains under matched feature budgets. Table 1 reports the results on the SERS lung cancer screen-ing dataset. Compared with vanilla LassoNet, AdLNet achieves better test performance under validation-selected sparse checkpoints, particularly in terms of test accuracy and AUC. This result suggests that introducing adversarial sta-bility into the sparse learning objective can improve out-of-sample generalization in the high-dimensional medical set-ting, where prediction-only sparse fitting may be more sensi-tive to unstable correlations in limited training data. To further examine whether this improvement simply comes from selecting more features, we conduct a controlled sparse-budget analysis in Table 7. Under a high-sparsity regime ( k ≈ 120 ), AdLNet slightly underperforms vanilla LassoNet, indicating that excessive stability pressure may re-move some predictive but perturbation-sensitive features and lead to underfitting. In contrast, under a moderate-sparsity regime ( k ≈ 250 ), AdLNet achieves higher test accuracy than vanilla LassoNet. These results reveal an important trade-off between sparsity and stability: adversarial perturbation is most beneficial when the feature budget is sufficient to re-tain stable predictive features, while overly restrictive sparsity may limit its advantage. Table 2 further reports the results on six public bench-mark datasets under the matched feature budget of k = 50 .AdLNet achieves the best test accuracy on MNIST, MNIST-Fashion, COIL-20, and Activity, and remains competitive on ISOLET and Mice Protein. Therefore, the proposed ob-jective does not sacrifice sparse-selection performance on standard benchmark datasets. Together, the SERS and pub-lic benchmark results demonstrate that AdLNet maintains competitive predictive performance under sparse feature se-lection, while offering improved generalization in the high-dimensional medical setting. 

Table 1: Feature selection performance on the SERS medical dataset. The reported checkpoints are selected by validation accu-racy under the constraint nselected < 300 .Metric LassoNet AdLNet Selected Features 119 256 Validation Accuracy (%) 75.7 73.6 Test Accuracy (%) 72.1 76.4 

Sensitivity (%) 85.7 71.4 Specificity (%) 77.8 82.5 

AUC 0.775 0.835 

Table 2: Test accuracy (%) on public benchmark datasets under the matched sparse-selection protocol. Results are averaged over five random seeds with target feature budget k = 50 .                                                                            

> Dataset Vanilla LassoNet FISTA-Net Deep-Lasso AdLNet Mice Protein 90.2 ±2.2 94.2 ±2.7 91.2 ±1.6 91.9 ±2.2 MNIST 88.5 ±0.9 89.0 ±11.3 86.0 ±1.6 89.4 ±0.9
> MNIST-Fashion 77.3 ±1.0 76.3 ±5.7 78.9 ±0.6 79.0 ±1.7
> ISOLET 82.0 ±1.1 85.4 ±2.9 82.7 ±1.6 83.9 ±1.0 COIL-20 98.5 ±0.9 96.5 ±2.7 98.3 ±0.8 99.2 ±0.6
> Activity 92.9 ±0.4 92.6 ±0.8 93.0 ±0.2 94.5 ±0.4

4.3 Robustness and Support Reproducibility under Spurious Correlation Shifts 

We next evaluate whether the proposed adversarial stabil-ity objective improves robustness and feature support repro-ducibility under spurious correlation shifts. To this end, we conduct experiments on ColoredMNIST, a controlled bench-mark in which color is spuriously correlated with class labels during training but becomes unreliable in the shifted test envi-ronment. This setting directly tests whether a sparse feature-selection method relies on shortcut-sensitive features or se-lects features that remain predictive under distribution shift. Table 3 reports the results. Compared with vanilla Las-soNet, AdLNet achieves better out-of-distribution (OOD) ac-curacy while maintaining nearly identical support sparsity (0.969 versus 0.966 ). This indicates that the robustness gain is not caused by selecting a denser feature subset. Instead, this improvement suggests that the stability-driven training signal introduced by adversarial perturbation contributes to better OOD robustness. Vanilla LassoNet performs sparse se-lection mainly according to prediction loss on the training dis-tribution, and therefore may retain shortcut-sensitive features that exploit the color-label correlation. In contrast, AdLNet incorporates local worst-case perturbations into the hierarchi-cal sparsity framework, encouraging the proximal updates to preserve features whose predictive contribution is more stable under local input perturbations. In addition to OOD robustness, AdLNet also improves fea-ture support reproducibility, as reflected by the higher Jaccard index across independent runs. This suggests that adversar-ial stability regularization makes the selected feature subsets less sensitive to random initialization and spurious training correlations. Overall, the ColoredMNIST results support our core hypothesis that integrating adversarial perturbation into sparse feature selection can improve both robustness and sup-port reproducibility under spurious correlation shifts. 

Table 3: ColoredMNIST results under nearly matched support spar-sity. ID and OOD accuracies are evaluated against the true labels. Gap denotes the ID–OOD accuracy difference, and Jaccard mea-sures support reproducibility across independent runs.                            

> Method ID Acc (%) OOD Acc (%) Gap (%) Support Sparsity Jaccard LassoNet 84.6 ±0.6 47.3 ±4.9 37.3 ±4.3 0.969 0.456 AdLNet 85.5 ±1.0 51.7 ±2.7 33.8 ±1.7 0.966 0.519

4.4 Spectral Diagnostics of Optimization Geometry 

We further analyze the empirical NTK and Hessian spectra to examine whether stability-driven training changes the op-timization geometry of sparse learning. The local analysis in Section 3.4 suggests that adversarial perturbation can in-crease the effective rank of the empirical NTK when the first-order spectral growth condition holds. Since this condition is derived for local infinitesimal perturbations, while our experi-ments compare trained models, the following analysis should be interpreted as an empirical diagnostic rather than a direct proof of the local condition. To quantify the macroscopic redistribution of NTK spec-tral mass, we compute the following empirical spectral-redistribution score: 

ˆGmacro = tr( Θρ − Θ0)tr( Θ0) − ⟨Θ0, Θρ − Θ0⟩∥Θ0∥2

> F

,

where 

Θ0 = J(X; θ0)J(X; θ0)⊤, Θρ = J(X; θρ)J(X; θρ)⊤.

Here, θ0 denotes the vanilla LassoNet checkpoint, and θρ

denotes the AdLNet checkpoint. Both empirical NTKs are evaluated on the same clean inputs X, so that the comparison reflects differences induced by the learned parameter config-urations rather than by different input samples. A positive value of ˆGmacro suggests that stability-driven training redis-tributes spectral mass toward less dominant NTK directions at the macroscopic level. In our experiment, we obtain ˆGmacro = 0 .121 , indicating a positive empirical spectral-redistribution trend. As shown Table 4: NTK and Hessian spectral diagnostics on ColoredMNIST. The NTK metrics characterize spectral concentration and effective rank, while the Hessian metrics characterize the local curvature pro-file.                                

> Spectrum Metric LassoNet AdLNet NTK Trace Tr(Θ) 15018.42 10219.46 Effective Rank ↑7.07 8.05
> λ1/Tr(Θ) ↓0.343 0.310
> Top-10 Energy Ratio ↓0.740 0.722
> Spectral Growth Coefficient ˆGmacro ↑–0.121
> Hessian Maximum Eigenvalue λmax ↓14.08 10.13
> Trace Tr( H)↓50.10 42.66
> Average Curvature ¯κ↓0.805 0.726

in Table 4, AdLNet produces a less concentrated NTK spec-trum than vanilla LassoNet, with a higher effective rank and lower dominant-eigenvalue energy concentration. This sug-gests that adversarial stability regularization suppresses ex-cessively dominant optimization directions and encourages a more distributed gradient geometry under sparse learning. A similar trend is observed in the Hessian spectrum. Com-pared with vanilla LassoNet, AdLNet yields a smoother local curvature profile with weaker sharp directions, indicating im-proved local optimization stability under perturbation-aware sparse learning. Together, the NTK and Hessian diagnostics are consistent with the spectral interpretation in Section 3.4: stability-driven training tends to reduce spectral concentra-tion and increase the effective rank of the empirical NTK. However, these results should be viewed as finite-sample di-agnostic evidence rather than a strict verification of the local condition G(E; Θ) > 0.

4.5 Component-wise Ablation Study 

We conduct ablation experiments on the Mice Protein dataset to examine the contribution of each component in AdLNet. Specifically, we compare the full model with vanilla Las-soNet and several partial variants, including LassoNet with only the stability-driven loss, LassoNet with adversarial per-turbation, and LassoNet with a gradient-norm penalty replac-ing directional adversarial perturbation. As shown in Table 5, the full AdLNet model achieves the best overall performance, with the highest test accuracy (92 .0% ) and the highest feature support consistency mea-sured by the Jaccard index ( 0.71 ). Compared with the par-tial variants that use only the stability-driven loss or only adversarial perturbation, the full model achieves better pre-dictive performance and support reproducibility. This indi-cates that the observed improvement cannot be explained by either component alone, but arises from their joint integration within the hierarchical sparsity framework. Replacing the directional adversarial perturbation with a gradient-norm penalty also degrades performance and intro-duces additional computational cost. This result suggests that the key benefit of AdLNet comes from explicitly probing lo-cally vulnerable input directions, rather than simply imposing a generic smoothness regularization. In other words, the di-rectional perturbation provides a more informative stability signal for guiding sparse feature selection. 

Table 5: Ablation study on Mice Protein. The full model achieves the best test accuracy and support consistency, while the gradient-norm penalty baseline incurs the largest computational cost.                                                             

> Method Val Acc (%) Test Acc (%) Jaccard Selected Ratio (%) Time (s) LassoNet 89.8 ±2.5 90.6 ±3.7 0.66 34.8 215 .3±1.9
> LassoNet + Stability Loss 91.3 ±2.7 90.4 ±2.7 0.69 34.5 305 .6±11 .5
> LassoNet + Adversarial 90.6 ±2.0 91.5 ±3.6 0.67 34.8 311 .8±20 .0
> LassoNet + Gradient Norm 90.1 ±3.1 90.6 ±3.6 0.65 33.8 552 .8±60 .6
> Full model 91.5 ±1.8 92.0 ±1.2 0.71 37.6 472 .4±5.6

Overall, the ablation results demonstrate that robust predic-tion and reproducible feature selection rely on the joint effect of perturbation-based stability regularization and hierarchical sparse support formation. 

4.6 Sensitivity to the Mixing Coefficient 

We finally analyze the effect of the adversarial mixing co-efficient α, which controls the balance between predictive fidelity and perturbation-driven stability. As shown in Ta-ble 6, AdLNet maintains relatively stable performance across a broad range of α values on most datasets, indicating that the proposed framework is not overly sensitive to a narrowly tuned mixing coefficient. The results also reflect the trade-off introduced by the mixed objective. A smaller α places more emphasis on the original prediction objective, while a larger α increases the influence of perturbation-driven stability. Therefore, moder-ate values of α can better balance clean predictive informa-tion and stability regularization in many cases. The optimal value of α varies across datasets, suggesting that this balance is data-dependent. 

Table 6: Sensitivity analysis of the adversarial mixing coefficient α.Validation and test accuracies are reported under different α values. Bold values indicate the best validation accuracy for each dataset.                                                                                            

> Value of α00.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0 Dataset Val Test Val Test Val Test Val Test Val Test Val Test Mice Protein 91.3 90.4 92.0 91.6 90.2 90.6 90.6 91.8 91.3 90.8 92.2 90.9 MNIST 89.1 89.0 89.4 89.2 88.5 88.4 88.8 88.0 88.9 88.6 87.8 87.7 MNIST-Fashion 78.1 78.2 79.3 79.1 78.8 79.4 79.0 79.6 79.0 78.7 78.5 79.1 ISOLET 83.2 83.2 84.4 84.2 83.4 83.5 84.6 83.7 82.7 82.5 82.6 82.1 COIL-20 99.0 99.4 99.6 99.2 98.8 99.7 98.5 99.4 98.8 99.2 98.9 99.2 Activity 98.1 92.2 98.0 93.3 98.2 93.4 98.4 93.5 98.2 93.5 98.1 93.5

## 5 Conclusion 

This paper presents AdLNet, a stability-driven sparse feature selection framework that integrates local adversarial pertur-bations into the hierarchical sparsity mechanism of LassoNet. By combining predictive relevance with local input stability, AdLNet encourages selected features to remain informative under both clean inputs and local worst-case perturbations, while preserving the original sparse optimization structure. We derive a first-order approximation for the adversarial per-turbation term and provide an NTK-inspired spectral analysis to characterize the effect of stability-driven training on sparse learning. Empirical results on high-dimensional SERS data, six public benchmark datasets, and ColoredMNIST show that AdLNet maintains competitive sparse-selection performance while improving robustness under spurious correlation shifts and enhancing feature support reproducibility. NTK and Hes-sian diagnostics further provide finite-sample evidence con-sistent with the proposed spectral interpretation, suggesting that the observed robustness improvements are associated with reduced spectral concentration and a milder local cur-vature profile. The current study focuses on feature-level sparse selection within the LassoNet framework and analyzes stability mainly from the perspective of local input perturbations. This setting allows us to clearly examine the interaction between hierar-chical sparsity and adversarial stability, but broader forms of sparse learning remain to be explored. Future work will in-vestigate whether the same stability-driven principle can be extended to other sparsity structures, such as weight sparsity and attention sparsity, as well as to more diverse distribution-shift scenarios. 

## Appendix A First-Order Approximation of Local Adversarial Sensitivity 

This appendix provides a rigorous error bound for the first-order approximation used to construct local adversarial per-turbations in the main text. For fixed parameters and label 

(θ, y ), define the loss function as 

ℓ(x) := L(fθ (x), y ).

Under Assumption 1 in the main text, ℓ(x) is differentiable in a neighborhood of x, and the input gradient is locally Lips-chitz continuous. That is, there exists Lx > 0 such that for all perturbations r with ∥r∥2 ≤ ρ,

∥∇ xℓ(x + r) − ∇ xℓ(x)∥2 ≤ Lx ∥r∥2 .

A.1 First-Order Expansion and Residual Bound 

By the fundamental theorem of calculus, the change in loss can be written exactly as an integral of the gradient: 

ℓ(x + r) − ℓ(x) = 

Z 10

∇xℓ(x + tr), r dt

Inserting ∇xℓ(x) inside the integral, we decompose the difference into a first-order linear term and a remainder 

R2(x, r):

ℓ(x + r) − ℓ(x) = ∇xℓ(x), r

+

Z 10

∇xℓ(x + tr) − ∇ xℓ(x), r dt

| {z }

> R2(x,r)

.

Taking absolute value and applying the Cauchy–Schwarz in-equality together with the Lipschitz condition: 

|R2(x, r)| ≤ 

Z 10

∥∇ xℓ(x + tr) − ∇ xℓ(x)∥2 ∥r∥2 dt

≤

Z 10

Lxt ∥r∥22 dt = Lx

2 ∥r∥22 .

Since ∥r∥ ≤ ρ, the residual is bounded by Lx 

> 2

ρ2.

A.2 Local Adversarial Sensitivity 

The local adversarial sensitivity is defined as the maximal loss increase within the ρ-ball: 

Sρ(x, y ; θ) := max 

> ∥r∥2≤ρ

[ℓ(x + r) − ℓ(x)] = max 

> ∥r∥2≤ρ

⟨∇ xℓ(x), r⟩ + R2(x, r).

By Cauchy–Schwarz, the first-order term is maximized when 

r is aligned with ∇xℓ(x), giving ρ ∥∇ xℓ(x)∥2. Combined with the residual bound, the maximum absolute error is 

O(ρ2). Hence the first-order approximation 

Sρ(x, y ; θ) = ρ ∥∇ xℓ(x)∥2 + O(ρ2)

holds rigorously. 

## B First-Order Spectral Analysis of Effective Rank 

We derive the first-order Taylor expansion of the effective rank of the perturbed empirical NTK. Let Θ ∈ RN ×N be a nonzero symmetric positive-semidefinite matrix. The effec-tive rank is 

reff (Θ) = tr( Θ)2

∥Θ∥2

> F

.

Consider the perturbed empirical NTK 

eΘ(ρ) = Θ + ρE + R(ρ), ∥R(ρ)∥F = o(ρ),

where E is symmetric and eΘ(ρ) ⪰ 0 for sufficiently small 

ρ > 0. The Frobenius inner product is ⟨A, B⟩ = tr( A⊤B).

Lemma 4. Let T = tr( Θ) > 0 and S = ∥Θ∥2F > 0. The perturbed effective rank satisfies 

reff ( eΘ(ρ)) = reff (Θ)+2 reff (Θ)

 tr( E)tr( Θ) − ⟨Θ, E⟩∥Θ∥2F



ρ+o(ρ).

Proof. Using linearity of the trace, 

tr( eΘ(ρ)) = T + ρ tr( E) + o(ρ).

For the denominator, 

∥ eΘ(ρ)∥2F = ∥Θ + ρE + R(ρ)∥2F = S + 2 ρ⟨Θ, E⟩ + o(ρ),

where cross terms involving R(ρ) are o(ρ). Substituting into the effective rank: 

reff ( eΘ(ρ)) = 

 T + ρ tr( E) + o(ρ)2

S + 2 ρ⟨Θ, E⟩ + o(ρ) = T 2 + 2 ρT tr( E) + o(ρ)

S + 2 ρ⟨Θ, E⟩ + o(ρ) .

Apply the first-order expansion 

A + ρa B + ρb = AB



1 + ρ aA − ρ bB



+ o(ρ)

with A = T 2, a = 2 T tr( E), B = S, b = 2 ⟨Θ, E⟩. Recall-ing reff (Θ) = T 2/S ,

reff ( eΘ(ρ)) = reff (Θ)



1 + ρ 2T tr( E)

T 2 − ρ 2⟨Θ, E⟩

S



+o(ρ).

Simplifying yields the statement of the lemma. C Evaluation Metrics 

This appendix defines the metrics used in the experiments and states the preferred direction for each metric. 

Selected Feature Count and Sparsity. For a selected fea-ture set A and input dimension d,Sparsity = |A|

d .

Lower sparsity indicates a smaller selected support, provided that predictive performance is maintained. 

Jaccard Index. For two selected feature sets A and B from independent runs, 

J(A, B ) = |A ∩ B||A ∪ B| .

Higher values indicate more reproducible feature selection. 

ID and OOD Accuracy. Classification accuracy is Accuracy = Number of correct predictions Total number of samples .

Higher values indicate better predictive performance. ID ac-curacy is measured on in-distribution data, whereas OOD ac-curacy is measured under the specified distribution shift. 

ID–OOD Gap. We quantify robustness under shift as Gap = ID Accuracy − OOD Accuracy .

Lower values indicate a smaller degradation from ID to OOD evaluation. 

Empirical NTK Effective Rank. For an empirical NTK matrix Θ ∈ RN ×N ,

reff (Θ) = tr(Θ) 2

∥Θ∥2

> F

.

Higher values indicate a less concentrated NTK spectrum. 

Leading Eigenvalue Ratio. Let λ1(Θ) be the largest eigen-value of Θ. We report 

λ1(Θ) tr(Θ) .

Lower values indicate that the dominant spectral mode ac-counts for a smaller fraction of total kernel energy. 

Top-k Energy Ratio. For eigenvalues λ1(Θ) ≥ · · · ≥

λN (Θ) ≥ 0, Pki=1 λi(Θ) tr(Θ) 

measures the fraction of spectral energy in the leading k di-rections. We use k = 10 . Lower values indicate less concen-tration in the leading eigendirections. 

Hessian Diagnostics. Let H be the Hessian of the training objective with respect to model parameters. We report the maximum eigenvalue λmax (H), the trace tr( H), and the av-erage curvature 

¯κ = tr( H)dim( H) .

Lower values indicate milder local curvature. 

## D Supplementary Analysis on Controlled Feature Budgets 

To complement the SERS evaluation in the main text, we report controlled feature-budget results under two sparsity regimes. This analysis separates the effect of adversarial sta-bility from the effect of selecting more features. 

Table 7: Controlled feature-budget analysis on the SERS dataset. “Standard” denotes vanilla LassoNet, and “Adversarial” denotes the proposed stability-driven framework. Absolute changes ( ∆) com-pare the adversarial model with the standard model under the same sparsity regime.                                                     

> Budget / Model Val Acc Test Acc Sens Spec AUC Features
> High-Sparsity Regime ( k≈120 )
> Standard (clean) 75.71 72.14 85.71 58.57 0.775 119 Adversarial (sam) 47.86 52.86 62.86 42.86 0.482 122
> ∆(sam −clean) −27 .86 −19 .29 −22 .86 −15 .71 −0.293 +3
> Moderate-Sparsity Regime ( k≈250 )
> Standard (clean) 57.14 62.14 85.71 38.57 0.672 272 Adversarial (sam) 73.57 76.43 71.43 81.43 0.825 256
> ∆(sam −clean) +16 .43 +14 .29 −14 .29 +42 .86 +0 .154 −16

Under the high-sparsity budget, the adversarial model se-lects nearly the same number of features as the standard model but performs worse. Under the moderate-sparsity bud-get, it improves test accuracy and AUC while selecting fewer features. These results suggest that the SERS gains in the main experiments are not explained by feature-count expan-sion alone. Instead, the effect of adversarial stability depends on whether the feature budget allows a sufficiently informa-tive and stable support to be retained. 

## References 

Davide Anguita, Alessandro Ghio, Luca Oneto, Xavier Parra, and Jorge Luis Reyes-Ortiz. A public domain dataset for human activity recognition using smartphones. In Eu-ropean Symposium on Artificial Neural Networks , pages 437–442, 2013. Martin Arjovsky, L´ eon Bottou, Ishaan Gulrajani, and David Lopez-Paz. Invariant risk minimization. arXiv preprint arXiv:1907.02893 , 2019. Peter L Bartlett, Philip M Long, G´ abor Lugosi, and Alexander Tsigler. Benign overfitting in linear regres-sion. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences ,117(48):30063–30070, 2020. Samir Brahim Belhaouari, Mohammed Bilal Shakeel, Aiman Erbad, Zarina Oflaz, and Khelil Kassoul. Bird’s eye view feature selection for high-dimensional data. Scientific Re-ports , 13(1):13303, 2023. Alexander Brown, Nenad Tomasev, Jan Freyberg, Yuan Liu, Alan Karthikesalingam, and Jessica Schrouff. Detecting shortcut learning for fair medical ai using shortcut testing. 

Nature Communications , 14(1):4314, 2023. Valeriia Cherepanova, Roman Levin, Gowthami Somepalli, Jonas Geiping, C. Bayan Bruss, Andrew Gordon Wilson, Tom Goldstein, and Micah Goldblum. A performance-driven benchmark for feature selection in tabular deep learning. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , volume 36, 2023. Francesco Conti, Mario D’Acunto, Claudia Caudai, Sara Colantonio, Raffaele Gaeta, Davide Moroni, and Maria Antonietta Pascali. Raman spectroscopy and topological machine learning for cancer grading. Scientific Reports , 13(1):7282, 2023. Mark Fanty and Ronald Cole. Spoken letter recognition. Ad-vances in Neural Information Processing Systems , 3, 1991. Samuel G. Finlayson, John D. Bowers, Joichi Ito, Jonathan L. Zittrain, Andrew L. Beam, and Isaac S. Kohane. Ad-versarial attacks on medical machine learning. Science ,363(6433):1287–1289, 2019. Pierre Foret, Ariel Kleiner, Hossein Mobahi, and Behnam Neyshabur. Sharpness-aware minimization for efficiently improving generalization. In International Conference on Learning Representations , 2021. Robert Geirhos, Jorn-Henrik Jacobsen, Claudio Michaelis, Richard Zemel, Wieland Brendel, Matthias Bethge, and Felix A. Wichmann. Shortcut learning in deep neural net-works. Nature Machine Intelligence , 2:665–673, 2020. Ben Glocker, Mirco Musolesi, Jonathan Richens, and Caro-line Uhler. Causality in digital medicine. Nature Commu-nications , 12(1):5471, 2021. Ian J. Goodfellow, Jonathon Shlens, and Christian Szegedy. Explaining and harnessing adversarial examples. In Inter-national Conference on Learning Representations , 2015. Isabelle Guyon and Andr´ e Elisseeff. An introduction to vari-able and feature selection. Journal of Machine Learning Research , 3(Mar):1157–1182, 2003. Tianyu Han, Sven Nebelung, Federico Pedersoli, Markus Zimmermann, Maximilian Schulze-Hagen, Michael Ho, Christoph Haarburger, Fabian graves Kiessling, Christiane Kuhl, Volkmar Schulz, and Daniel Truhn. Advancing di-agnostic performance and clinical usability of neural net-works via adversarial training and dual batch normaliza-tion. Nature Communications , 12(1):4315, 2021. Clara Higuera, Katheleen J. Gardiner, and Krzysztof J. Cios. Expression data from the brain of control and trisomic mice. UCI Machine Learning Repository, 2015. Arthur Jacot, Franck Gabriel, and Cl´ ement Hongler. Neural tangent kernel: Convergence and generalization in neural networks. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , volume 31, pages 8571–8580, 2018. Jie Ji, Gen Li, Jingjing Fu, Fatemeh Afghah, Linke Guo, Xi-aoyong Yuan, and Xiaolong Ma. A single-step, sharpness-aware minimization is all you need to achieve efficient and accurate sparse training. In Advances in Neural Informa-tion Processing Systems (NeurIPS) , 2024. Ragini Kothari, Veronica Jones, Dominique Mena, Viviana Bermudez Reyes, Youkang Shon, Jennifer P. Smith, Daniel Schmolze, Philip D. Cha, Lily Lai, Yuman Fong, and Michael C. Storrie-Lombardi. Raman spectroscopy and artificial intelligence to predict the bayesian probability of breast cancer. Scientific Reports , 11(1):6482, 2021. Yann LeCun, L´ eon Bottou, Yoshua Bengio, and Patrick Haffner. Gradient-based learning applied to document recognition. Proceedings of the IEEE , 86(11):2278–2324, 1998. Ismael Lemhadri, Feng Ruan, Louis Abraham, and Robert Tibshirani. Lassonet: A neural network with feature spar-sity. Journal of Machine Learning Research , 22(127):1– 29, 2021. Fuwei Li, Lifeng Lai, and Shuguang Cui. On the adversarial robustness of lasso based feature selection. IEEE Transac-tions on Signal Processing , 69:5555–5567, 2021. Aleksander Madry, Aleksandar Makelov, Ludwig Schmidt, Dimitris Tsipras, and Adrian Vladu. Towards deep learn-ing models resistant to adversarial attacks. In International Conference on Learning Representations , 2018. Lukas Meier, Sara van de Geer, and Peter B¨ uhlmann. The group lasso for logistic regression. Journal of the Royal Statistical Society: Series B , 70(1):53–71, 2008. Sameer A. Nene, Shree K. Nayar, and Hiroshi Murase. Columbia object image library (coil-20). Technical report, Columbia University, 1996. Andrew Slavin Ross and Finale Doshi-Velez. Improving the adversarial robustness and interpretability of deep neural networks by regularizing their input gradients. In AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence , 2018. Shiori Sagawa, Pang Wei Koh, Tatsunori B. Hashimoto, and Percy Liang. Distributionally robust neural networks for group shifts: On the importance of regularization for worst-case generalization. In International Conference on Learning Representations , 2020. Shiori Sagawa, Pang Wei Koh, Tatsunori B. Hashimoto, and Percy Liang. Distributionally robust neural networks for group shifts: On the importance of regularization for worst-case generalization. In International Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR) , 2020. Robert Tibshirani. Regression shrinkage and selection via the lasso. Journal of the Royal Statistical Society: Series B, 58(1):267–288, 1996. Sandra Wachter, Brent Mittelstadt, and Chris Russell. Coun-terfactual explanations without opening the black box: Au-tomated decisions and the gdpr. Harvard Journal of Law & Technology , 31(2):841–887, 2018. Jinxi Xiang, Yonggui Dong, and Yunjie Yang. Fista-net: Learning a fast iterative shrinkage thresholding network for inverse problems in imaging. IEEE Transactions on Medi-cal Imaging , 40(5):1329–1339, 2021. Han Xiao, Kashif Rasul, and Roland Vollgraf. Fashion-mnist: A novel image dataset for benchmarking machine learning algorithms. arXiv preprint arXiv:1708.07747 , 2017. Libo Yang, Dawei Zhu, Xuemei Liu, and Pei Cui. Robust fea-ture selection method based on joint l2,1 norm minimiza-tion for sparse regression. Electronics , 12(21):4450, 2023.