Title: Modeling the impact of filter-substrate refraction in the Roman point spread function

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2606.11305v1

Published Time: Thu, 11 Jun 2026 00:10:44 GMT

Number of Pages: 19

Markdown Content:
MNRAS 000 , 1–19 (2026) Preprint 11 June 2026 Compiled using MNRAS L ATEX style file v3.0 

# Modeling the impact of filter-substrate refraction in the Roman point spread function 

# Federico Berlfein 1★, Rachel Mandelbaum 1, Tianqing Zhang 2, Nihar Dalal 3,4, Christopher M. Hirata 3,4,5,Charuhas Shiveshwarkar 3,4 and Anthony Harbo Torres 3,4 

> 1

McWilliams Center for Cosmology and Astrophysics, Department of Physics, Carnegie Mellon University, Pittsburgh, PA 15213, USA  

> 2

Department of Physics and Astronomy and PITT PACC, University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA 15260, USA  

> 3

Center for Cosmology and Astroparticle Physics, 191 West Woodruff Avenue, Columbus, OH 43210, USA  

> 4

Department of Physics, The Ohio State University, 191 West Woodruff Avenue, Columbus, OH 43210, USA  

> 5

Department of Astronomy, The Ohio State University, 140 West 18th Avenue, Columbus, OH 43210, USA 

Accepted XXX. Received YYY; in original form ZZZ 

ABSTRACT 

For broadband imaging surveys, filter-substrate refraction causes light at different wavelengths to follow slightly different paths through the filter substrate before reaching the detector. This effect produces two chromatic perturbations to the point spread function (PSF): a shift in the effective focal position along the optical axis (longitudinal shift), which manifests as a defocus-like perturbation, and a wavelength-dependent displacement of the image position in the focal plane (lateral shift), which manifests as image decentering. Using image simulations, we provide the first study of these two effects independently across all eight 

Roman imaging bands and over the full focal plane. We compute the resulting PSF and photometric errors from images with and without the effect included, and compare the magnitude of the effect to the Roman science requirements. We find that the lateral shift is the dominant contribution, producing PSF size and ellipticity residuals in most bands of order ∼ 0.3–0.4% .These exceed the Roman science requirements for weak lensing by roughly an order of magnitude. The effect is also strongly field dependent, increasing toward the edges of the focal plane. By contrast, flux residuals remain below one third of the 1% 

requirement for most bands, except in R062 and W146. We find the longitudinal shift to be subdominant and negligible in most bands, including the weak lensing bands. Finally, we implement the dominant lateral-shift effect in a framework suitable for large-scale image simulations and validate that the resulting PSF size and shape changes are accurately reproduced. Overall, we find that filter-substrate refraction is a relevant chromatic effect for Roman PSF modeling, and we provide tools to model and incorporate it in large-scale image simulations. 

Key words: gravitational lensing: weak – cosmology: observations – techniques: image processing 

1 INTRODUCTION 

Weak gravitational lensing (WL) is one of the primary cosmological probes (Bernstein & Jarvis 2002; Hoekstra & Jain 2008; Mandel-baum 2018) that will be pursued by the Nancy Grace Roman Space Telescope (Spergel et al. 2015; Akeson et al. 2019). Roman ’s com-bination of wide area, near-infrared imaging, and stable space-based observing conditions is designed to support, among other things, high-precision measurements of weak lensing and large-scale struc-ture (Troxel et al. 2021; Liaudat et al. 2023). Making use of the full statistical power of these observations, however, requires ex-ceptional control of instrumental systematics, among which point spread function (PSF) modeling is particularly important (Liaudat et al. 2023). Since an observed galaxy image is the convolution of the true surface-brightness distribution of the galaxy with the PSF, inaccuracies in the modeled PSF can propagate directly into biases in galaxy shape measurements and hence into the inferred weak lensing signal (Mandelbaum 2018). For the Roman High-Latitude Wide Area  

> ★

E-mail: fberlfei@andrew.cmu.edu 

Survey (HLWAS) in particular, stringent requirements on knowledge of PSF size and ellipticity (Kruk et al. 2023) reflect the need to keep such errors below the level at which they would bias cosmological constraints. An important problem in PSF modeling is that broadband PSFs are intrinsically chromatic (Meyers & Burchat 2015; Carlsten et al. 2018; Eriksen & Hoekstra 2018; Schutt et al. 2025). Understanding the in-strumental or astrophysical effects generating chromatic effects on the PSF is therefore essential for constructing an accurate PSF model for weak lensing analyses. The origin and importance of these effects, however, differ substantially between space-based and ground-based telescopes, since not only the optical design of the telescope changes, but also the role of the atmosphere. In ground-based surveys, the PSF is strongly influenced by atmospheric effects (McKechnie 1992; Meyers & Burchat 2015), whereas for space-based telescopes, such as Roman , the PSF is dominated by diffraction (Cypriano et al. 2010; Carlsten et al. 2018). As a result, the PSF in space-based telescopes can be more strongly wavelength dependent than in ground-based surveys (Cypriano et al. 2010), making chromatic PSF effects a par-ticularly important concern. 

© 2026 The Authors 

> arXiv:2606.11305v1 [astro-ph.IM] 9 Jun 2026

# 2 F. Berlfein et al. 

Although the dominant chromaticity of the Roman PSF arises from diffraction, the telescope is not completely free of refractive elements. Within the Roman Wide Field Instrument (WFI), the filters are among the few transmissive elements in the optical system, and are made of fused-silica substrates (Cromey et al. 2023) whose refractive index varies with wavelength. As a result, photons at different wavelengths can follow slightly different paths as they pass through the filter substrate, introducing an additional chromatic perturbation on top of the already wavelength-dependent PSF. It is therefore important to understand how filter-substrate refraction enters the Roman PSF, and assess whether the resulting perturbations are large enough to require modeling or correction for precision cosmological analysis with Roman .Previous work has already shown that chromatic PSF effects can be important for precision weak lensing surveys, although looking at entirely different chromatic effects from the one considered in this work. For ground-based surveys, wavelength-dependent refraction has been studied primarily in the context of atmospheric differen-tial chromatic refraction and chromatic seeing (Plazas & Bernstein 2012; Meyers & Burchat 2015), which if left uncorrected can pro-duce centroid shifts and PSF distortions large enough to exceed the systematic-error budgets of surveys such as DES (The Dark Energy Survey Collaboration 2005) and LSST (LSST Science Collaboration et al. 2009; Ivezić et al. 2019). For space-based missions, related work has instead focused on chromatic PSF biases arising from the wave-length dependence of the optical response and from color differences between stars and galaxies used for PSF calibration in the context of wavelength-dependent diffraction effects (Eriksen & Hoekstra 2018; Berlfein et al. 2025). In both cases, chromatic PSF effects were shown to be a significant source of PSF modeling error for Stage IV 1 weak lensing measurements. Recent work has also studied chromatic effects associated with the 

Roman WFI filters themselves. Switzer et al. (2025) characterized the field dependence of the WFI filter transmission, showing that angle-of-incidence effects and variations in filter coating thickness across the field of view produce spatially varying shifts in the effective band-pass. This characterization models the chromatic amplitude response of the filter by integrating transmission over the pupil, and is therefore distinct from the chromatic phase effects arising from wavelength-dependent refraction through the filter substrate. For Euclid, Euclid Collaboration et al. (2022) characterized the spatial variability of the Near-Infrared Spectrometer and Photometer (NISP) filter trans-mission and angle-of-incidence effects, showing that these produce bandpass blueshifts with implications for photometric redshift ac-curacy. Separately, chromatic effects arising from coating thickness variations in the dichroic mirror have also been characterized and modeled for Euclid (Baron et al. 2023). These studies make clear that chromaticity can be an important source of systematic error in imaging surveys, but the specific effect considered in this work is physically distinct: it arises from wavelength-dependent refraction from the Roman WFI filter substrate. Given Roman ’s diffraction-limited nature, filter-substrate refrac-tion has received comparatively less attention in the context of PSF modeling. Existing large-scale image simulations of the Roman WFI have used highly realistic PSF models 2 that include a wide range           

> 1Stage IV surveys should collectively achieve or exceed a factor of 10 gain over Stage II experiments in the dark energy figure of merit (Albrecht et al. 2006).
> 2Realistic Roman PSF models can be found in STPSF (Perrin et al. 2014) and in the GalSim (Rowe et al. 2015) Roman module (Kannawadi et al. 2016).

of relevant effects, including telescope aberrations, detector effects, and observing conditions (Troxel et al. 2023; OpenUniverse et al. 2025). However, they do not currently include a dedicated treatment of wavelength-dependent refraction by the filter substrate. This ef-fect is potentially important for two reasons. First, because Roman is diffraction limited already, the contributions from refraction become coupled with the pre-existing wavelength dependence of the PSF. Second, the magnitude of the effect is expected to vary with both field position and wavelength, making it potentially relevant for PSF calibration and image simulation. In this paper, we isolate and quantify the impact of filter-substrate refraction on the Roman PSF. We show that the effect can be under-stood in terms of two wavelength-dependent geometric quantities: a lateral chromatic shift, which induces a wavelength-dependent dis-placement of the image position in the focal plane, and a longitudinal chromatic shift, which moves the location of best focus position for a given photon along the optical axis by an amount depending on its wavelength. We derive an analytic formalism for these shifts, re-late them to standard wavefront-aberration terms, and evaluate them using Roman -specific optical parameters. We then validate the ana-lytic model against a full Roman ray-tracing calculation, propagate the resulting perturbations into PSF size, shape, and point-source flux errors using image simulations, and finally develop a practical implementation suitable for large-scale image simulations. The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. In Sec. 2, we develop the formalism for chromatic refraction in the Roman filter substrate and describe the Roman -specific optical inputs required to evaluate it. In Sec. 3, we describe how these chromatic shifts are in-corporated into Roman PSF image simulations. In Sec. 4, we validate the analytic model against ray tracing and quantify the resulting PSF and photometric errors across bands and field position. In Sec. 5, we present a practical implementation of the dominant effect for large-scale image simulations. We summarize our conclusions in Sec. 6. 

2 REFRACTION FORMALISM 

In this section, we establish the formalism used throughout the paper to model the effect of filter-substrate refraction on the Roman PSF. The main objective is to describe how the wavelength dependence of the filter refractive index produces chromatic shifts in both the image position and the location of best focus, and to express those shifts in a form that can later be incorporated into image simulations. We first outline the physical origin of the effect and derive an analytic pre-scription to calculate the chromatic shifts. We then relate these shifts to the corresponding wavefront-aberrations, and finally describe the 

Roman -specific optical and design specifications needed to calculate the relevant quantities. 

2.1 Description of problem 

The point spread function (PSF) of a broadband imaging system is intrinsically chromatic (Meyers & Burchat 2015; Carlsten et al. 2018; Eriksen & Hoekstra 2018): photons of different wavelengths do not, in general, follow exactly the same path through the optical system. For a diffraction-limited, space-based telescope such as Ro-man , this wavelength dependence is especially important (Cypriano et al. 2010; Berlfein et al. 2025). Although Roman does not suffer from atmospheric refraction (e.g. Meyers & Burchat 2015), it is not free of refractive elements. In particular, the WFI filters are among the main transmissive elements in the optical system, so wavelength-dependent refraction in the filter substrate can perturb an already  

> MNRAS 000 , 1–19 (2026)

# Filter Refraction 3      

> Figure 1. Schematic illustration of chromatic refraction in the Roman WFI filter substrate, strongly exaggerated for visualization purposes. As shown, light rays of different wavelengths refract by slightly different amounts as they pass through the curved transmissive filter, causing them to propagate in different directions and reach their focus position at different (wavelength-dependent) locations relative to the nominal detector plane. This produces both wavelength-dependent lateral shifts in the focal plane, denoted Δ𝑥 and
> Δ𝑦 , and a longitudinal shift in the best-focus position along the optical axis, denoted Δ𝑧 . In the broadband PSF, these chromatic displacements manifest as wavelength-dependent image translations and defocus-like perturbations.

chromatic PSF. In this work, we focus on how refraction in the Ro-man WFI filter substrate modifies the PSF, which becomes an error in the PSF model if not properly accounted for. The physical origin of the effect is straightforward. The WFI filters are transmissive fused-silica elements (Cromey et al. 2023) whose refractive index varies with wavelength. As a result, light rays at different wavelengths follow slightly different paths through the fil-ter substrate. This produces two related chromatic shifts, illustrated schematically in Fig. 1: a longitudinal shift , Δ𝑧 , in the effective focal position along the optical axis, and lateral shifts , Δ𝑥 and Δ𝑦 , in the image position within the focal plane (Born & Wolf 1980; Wyant & Creath 1992). Both effects modify the effective broadband PSF, with the former acting primarily as a defocus-like perturbation, while the latter manifests as wavelength-dependent image decentering. The goal of this work is to quantify these shifts and determine how they translate into PSF modeling errors across the Roman bands. These effects are potentially important for Roman PSF modeling. Accurate PSF models are required both for realistic image simula-tions and for downstream calibration analyses, particularly for weak lensing measurements (Anderson & King 2000; Piotrowski et al. 2013; Jarvis et al. 2021; Liaudat et al. 2023; Schutt et al. 2025), where stringent requirements are placed on PSF size and shape er-rors (e.g. The LSST Dark Energy Science Collaboration et al. 2018; Kruk et al. 2023). Existing PSF models used in large-scale Roman 

image simulations (Troxel et al. 2023; OpenUniverse et al. 2025) typically include the telescope optics, detector effects, and other in-strumental contributions, but do not include a dedicated treatment of chromatic refraction by the filter substrate. It is therefore necessary to determine the magnitude of this effect, how it varies with wavelength and field position, and whether it is large enough to require modeling and correction for Roman science, particularly weak lensing. 

2.2 Analytic prescription 

We now derive the geometric formalism used to predict the chro-matic displacements induced by refraction in a curved filter sub-strate. Physically, these shifts depend on wavelength and on the local incidence angle at the filter. In practice, we infer this incidence an-gle 𝜽 from the detector position xdet using the field geometry. We denote this dependence as 𝜽 (xdet ). The goal is to compute, at wave-length 𝜆 relative to a reference wavelength 𝜆 ref , the transverse shifts in the focal plane, Δ𝑥 (𝜆 ; 𝜆 ref , 𝜽 (xdet )) , Δ𝑦 (𝜆 ; 𝜆 ref , 𝜽 (xdet )) , and the longitudinal shift in the best-focus position, Δ𝑧 (𝜆 ; 𝜆 ref , 𝜽 (xdet )) . For readability, we use this full notation only when the dependence on reference wavelength or field position is important; otherwise, we write these quantities more compactly as Δ𝑥 (𝜆 ), Δ𝑦 (𝜆 ), and Δ𝑧 (𝜆 ),or as Δ𝑥 (𝜆 ; 𝜆 ref ), Δ𝑦 (𝜆 ; 𝜆 ref ), and Δ𝑧 (𝜆 ; 𝜆 ref ) when emphasizing the reference wavelength. These shift quantities are the fundamental outputs of the formalism and are directly related to the perturbations to the PSF. The diagram in Fig. 2 is provided as a visual guide to the notation, geometry, and derivations used throughout this section. The diagram is split in two, with the upper half showing the relevant quantities needed for the lateral shifts, while the lower half represents the construction used for the longitudinal shift. 

2.2.1 Ray geometry and refraction through a meniscus filter 

We begin by describing how a single ray propagates through the filter substrate at a given wavelength. The filter is a transmissive optical element, so its effect on a ray is governed by refraction at its two surfaces. The strength of that refraction mainly depends on the refractive index of the substrate material, the thickness of the filter, the incidence angle of the ray, and the filter geometry. Starting from the refractive index, we model it using the Sellmeier relation (Born & Wolf 1980): 

𝑛 (𝜆 ) =



1 + 𝐵 1𝜆 2

𝜆 2 − 𝐶 1

+ 𝐵 2𝜆 2

𝜆 2 − 𝐶 2

+ 𝐵 3𝜆 2

𝜆 2 − 𝐶 3

1/2

, (1) where the coefficients (𝐵 𝑖 , 𝐶 𝑖 ) are specific to each substrate. We work in the plane containing the optical axis and chief ray (also known as the tangential or meridional plane), with transverse coordinate 𝑞 and optical-axis coordinate 𝑧 . In this plane, the filter is represented by two spherical surfaces. The first (inner) surface, denoted 𝑆 1, has vertex at 

𝑧 = 0, and the second (outer) surface, 𝑆 2, has vertex at 𝑧 = 𝑡 , where 

𝑡 is the central thickness of the filter. Their radii of curvature (ROC) are 𝑅 1 and 𝑅 2, respectively. The shape of each spherical surface is described by its sag, 

𝑧 sag (𝑞 ; 𝑅 ) = 𝑅 ±√︁ 𝑅 2 − 𝑞 2, (2) which gives the surface height 𝑧 as a function of transverse position 

𝑞 . The sign of the second term is positive if the radius of curvature is negative, and vice versa. To calculate refraction, we also need the surface normal to the point where the ray hits the surface. For a spherical surface, the corresponding unit normal is 

ˆn(𝑞, 𝑧 ; 𝑅 ) = (𝑞 /𝑅, 𝑧 /𝑅 − 1)√︁ 

(𝑞 /𝑅 )2 + ( 𝑧 /𝑅 − 1)2 . (3) This vector points perpendicular to the local surface and is the quan-tity that enters Snell’s law. Next, we specify the incoming ray. In a given meridional plane, we describe the incident ray direction by an angle 𝜃 measured with respect to the optical axis. The corresponding unit direction vector is 

p0 = (sin 𝜃, cos 𝜃 ). (4) We denote by 𝑠 the distance from the pupil to the first filter surface.  

> MNRAS 000 , 1–19 (2026)

# 4 F. Berlfein et al.                                 

> Figure 2. Schematic 2-D diagram of the notation and ray geometry described in Sec. 2.2 to model filter-substrate refraction. The horizontal and vertical axis represent the optical-axis coordinate 𝑧 and transverse coordinate 𝑞 , respectively. The incident beam is represented by its chief ray, which leaves the exit pupil at an angle 𝜃 relative to the optical axis. The filter is represented by two curved refracting surfaces, 𝑆 1and 𝑆 2, separated by the central thickness 𝑡 . The exit pupil is located a distance 𝑠 from 𝑆 1, and the focal plane array (FPA) is located a distance 𝐿 from 𝑆 2. The upper half shows the single-chief-ray construction used to compute the lateral displacement, Δ𝑞 (𝜆 ;𝜆 ref ), after tracing the chief ray at wavelengths 𝜆 and 𝜆 ref . The lower half shows the two-ray construction used to compute the longitudinal shift. The chief ray and a nearby probe ray are traced at wavelengths 𝜆 and 𝜆 ref , with the longitudinal shift, Δ𝑧 (𝜆 ;𝜆 ref ), defined as the separation between their resulting intersection positions.

In the geometric construction adopted here, the incoming ray is taken to intersect the first surface at the transverse coordinate 

𝑞 1 = 𝑠 tan 𝜃, 𝑧 1 = 𝑧 sag (𝑞 1; 𝑅 1). (5) This specifies the point on 𝑆 1 where the ray first encounters the filter. Once the ray reaches the surface, its direction changes according to Snell’s law. In its more familiar scalar form, Snell’s law states that 

𝑛 i sin 𝜃 i = 𝑛 r sin 𝜃 r, (6) where 𝑛 i and 𝑛 r are the refractive indices on the two sides of the interface, and 𝜃 i and 𝜃 r are the angles measured relative to the local surface normal. In our calculation, the filter surfaces are curved, so the surface normal changes from point to point across the filter. For that reason, it is more convenient to use a vector form of Snell’s law, which applies the same physical law but directly updates the ray direction using the local normal at the point of intersection. Let p be the incident unit direction and ˆn the unit normal at the surface. We define 

𝜇 = ˆn · p, 𝜂 = 𝑛 r

𝑛 i

. (7) Since p is a unit vector, the quantity 1 − 𝜇 2 is the squared sine of the incidence angle relative to the local normal. The refracted direction is then written as 

p1 = p0 +



−𝜇 ±√︃ 𝜂 2 −  1 − 𝜇 2 

ˆn, (8) followed by normalization to unit length. The square root term is positive for 𝜇 > 0 and negative for 𝜇 < 0. Equation (8) is therefore just Snell’s law written in vector form for a curved surface and allows us to compute the refracted direction directly from the local geometry of the filter surface. After refraction at the first surface, the ray propagates through the substrate along a straight line until it reaches the second surface. If a ray passes through the point (𝑞 1, 𝑧 1) with direction p1 = ( 𝑝 1,𝑞 , 𝑝 1,𝑧 ),its path can be written as 

𝑞 (ℓ) = 𝑞 1 + ℓ 𝑝 1,𝑞 , 𝑧 (ℓ) = 𝑧 1 + ℓ 𝑝 1,𝑧 , (9) where ℓ is the distance traveled along the ray. To determine where the ray intersects the second surface, we substitute Equation (9) into the spherical-surface relation defined by Equation (2) for 𝑆 2, and solve for the value of ℓ at which the ray reaches that surface. This gives the next intersection point (𝑞 2, 𝑧 2). The same vector form of Snell’s law is then applied again at the second surface, now for refraction from glass back into vacuum, yielding the outgoing direction p2.In summary, the propagation of a ray through the filter at a given wavelength proceeds as follows: we determine the refractive index 

𝑛 (𝜆 ), locate the point where the incoming ray intersects the first surface, compute the local surface normal, refract the ray into the substrate using Snell’s law, propagate it to the second surface, and refract it back out into vacuum.  

> MNRAS 000 , 1–19 (2026)

# Filter Refraction 5

2.2.2 Lateral chromatic shifts 

The lateral chromatic shift follows from comparing where a given input ray lands in the focal plane depending on its wavelength. In re-ality, an image is composed of a bundle of converging rays associated with the ray cone. However, for small incidence angles, it is fair to assume that the overall image displacement can be well represented by the shifts in the chief ray. Therefore, to avoid having to fully ray trace a beam bundle, we approximate the lateral shifts to the image by only tracing the chief ray as portrayed by the upper half of Fig. 2. For a given wavelength 𝜆 , we begin with the incident chief ray defined in Equation (4) and the corresponding starting point on the first filter surface given by Equation (5). We then propagate that ray through the two surfaces of the filter using the prescription described in the previous subsection: the ray is refracted at 𝑆 1, propagated through the substrate to 𝑆 2, refracted again as it exits the glass, and finally propagated to a plane representing the focal plane. If the ray exits the second surface from the point (𝑞 2, 𝑧 2) with direction p2 = ( 𝑝 𝑞, 2, 𝑝 𝑧, 2), we propagate it to the focal plane array (FPA). Denoting by 𝐿 the axial distance from the vertex of the second filter surface 𝑆 2 to the focal plane, the focal plane is located at 

𝑧 FPA = 𝑡 + 𝐿 , where 𝑡 is the central filter thickness as before. The outgoing ray intersects this plane when 𝑧 (ℓ) = 𝑧 FPA , which gives 

ℓFPA = 𝑧 FPA − 𝑧 2

𝑝 𝑧, 2

. (10) Then, the corresponding transverse coordinate in that plane is 

𝑞 FPA (𝜆 ) = 𝑞 2 + ℓFPA 𝑝 𝑞, 2. (11) This quantity is the predicted image position of the chief ray at wavelength 𝜆 . The chromatic lateral shift is defined by comparing this focal-plane position to that obtained at a reference wavelength 

𝜆 ref . We therefore define 

Δ𝑞 (𝜆 ; 𝜆 ref ) = 𝑞 FPA (𝜆 ) − 𝑞 FPA (𝜆 ref ). (12) This is the basic lateral chromatic shift in a single meridional plane. To obtain the two-dimensional shift in the focal plane, the same construction is applied independently in the two orthogonal planes. In the plane associated with the focal-plane 𝑥 direction, this gives 

Δ𝑥 (𝜆 ; 𝜆 ref ) = 𝑥 FPA (𝜆 ) − 𝑥 FPA (𝜆 ref ), (13) while in the orthogonal plane it gives 

Δ𝑦 (𝜆 ; 𝜆 ref ) = 𝑦 FPA (𝜆 ) − 𝑦 FPA (𝜆 ref ). (14) These shifts describe how the centroid of the image moves across the focal plane as a function of wavelength. 

2.2.3 Longitudinal chromatic shift 

The lateral shifts Δ𝑥 and Δ𝑦 follow from tracing a single chief ray to the focal plane. The longitudinal shift requires a different approach, as a single ray does not determine a focus position. Instead, we find where two neighboring rays intersect after passing through the filter, as portrayed by the lower half of Fig. 2. We estimate this using a local two-ray construction. The first ray is the chief ray with field angle 𝜃 , as defined in Sec. 2.2.2. The second is a probe ray, launched from a slightly displaced point on the first surface at 𝑞 p = 𝑞 c + 𝛿𝑞 probe , whose incident direction is chosen so that, in the absence of the filter, it would converge to the same nominal image point as the chief ray. Both rays are then traced through the two refracting surfaces using the prescription in Sec. 2.2.1. After exiting the filter, the outgoing chief and probe rays travel along straight lines with slopes 𝑚 c = 𝑝 c,2,𝑞 /𝑝 c,2,𝑧 and 𝑚 p =

𝑝 p,2,𝑞 /𝑝 p,2,𝑧 , respectively. The wavelength-dependent focus position is their intersection point, 

𝑧 focus (𝜆 ) = 𝑞 p,2 − 𝑞 c,2 + 𝑚 c 𝑧 c,2 − 𝑚 p 𝑧 p,2

𝑚 c − 𝑚 p

, (15) and the longitudinal chromatic shift is defined by comparing this to the focus position at a reference wavelength, 

Δ𝑧 (𝜆 ; 𝜆 ref ) = 𝑧 focus (𝜆 ) − 𝑧 focus (𝜆 ref ). (16) Thus, Δ𝑧 measures how the best-focus position moves along the optical axis as a function of wavelength due to refraction in the filter substrate. 

2.2.4 Connection to wavefront aberrations 

The quantities derived above, Δ𝑥 , Δ𝑦 , and Δ𝑧 , are geometric quan-tities: they describe how refraction in the filter substrate shifts the image position and the location of best focus as a function of wave-length. To connect these shifts to PSF modeling, it is useful to express them in the language of wavefront aberrations. A standard way to describe optical aberrations is through the op-tical path difference (OPD), which measures the departure of the wavefront from an ideal reference wavefront (Wyant & Creath 1992). If 𝐿 (𝜌, 𝜙 ) denotes the optical path length from the pupil to the im-age plane for a ray passing through pupil coordinates (𝜌, 𝜙 ), and 𝐿 0

denotes the path length of the ideal reference spherical wave, then the OPD is defined as 

𝑊 (𝜌, 𝜙 ) ≡ 𝐿 (𝜌, 𝜙 ) − 𝐿 0. (17) Because the pupil is circular, we expand the OPD in Zernike poly-nomials, 

𝑊 (𝜌, 𝜙 ) =

> ∞

∑︁ 

> 𝑗 =1

𝑎 𝑗 𝑍 𝑗 (𝜌, 𝜙 ), (18) where 𝑍 𝑗 (𝜌, 𝜙 ) denotes the 𝑗 -th Zernike polynomial 3 on the unit disk and 𝑎 𝑗 is the corresponding coefficient. Throughout this work we use the Noll convention (Noll 1976), under which the polynomials satisfy 𝑍 𝑖 𝑍 𝑗 = 𝛿 𝑖 𝑗 .The longitudinal shift Δ𝑧 is naturally interpreted as a defocus term. Physically, shifting the best-focus plane along the optical axis changes the quadratic variation of the wavefront across the pupil. For a beam with focal ratio 𝑁 = 𝑓 /𝐷 , a small axial displacement Δ𝑧 ,Wyant & Creath (1992) shows that the OPD is given by: 

𝑊 def (𝜌 ) = − Δ𝑧 

8𝑁 2



𝜌 2 − 12



, (19) which matches the fourth Zernike mode in the Noll convention: 

𝑍 4 (𝜌, 𝜙 ) = √3



2𝜌 2 − 1



= 2√3



𝜌 2 − 12



. (20) Comparing Equations (19) and (20) shows that Δ𝑧 maps directly onto the Noll defocus mode. Expressed in units of waves, the correspond-ing defocus coefficient is then: 

𝑎 4 (𝜆 ) = − Δ𝑧 (𝜆 )

16 √3 𝑁 2 𝜆 . (21) The lateral shifts Δ𝑥 and Δ𝑦 have a different interpretation. A   

> 3See Noll (1976) for an extensive description of the Zernike polynomials and their properties. MNRAS 000 , 1–19 (2026)

# 6 F. Berlfein et al.      

> Figure 3. Refractive index of the Roman WFI fused silica (Suprasil 3001) filter substrate as a function of wavelength. The substrate manufacturer provides the measured refractive-index at discrete wavelengths (red points), as well as the best fit parameters to the Sellmeier relation, showed in Equation (1), to construct the model fit (black solid line). The shaded regions indicate the wavelength coverage of the eight Roman imaging bands. The figure illustrates how the refractive index varies across wavelength and within each filter. The differences within each filter will cause the wavelength-dependent distortion in the broadband PSF shown in Fig. 1. Of particular interest are the Y106, J129, and H158 bands that will be used for weak lensing, where PSF error requirements are the most stringent.

wavelength-dependent displacement of the PSF centroid can be de-scribed either as a tip/tilt of the wavefront across the pupil or, equiv-alently, as a translation of the image in the focal plane. In the Noll convention, the corresponding tip and tilt modes are: 

𝑍 2 (𝜌, 𝜙 ) = 2𝜌 cos 𝜙, 𝑍 3 (𝜌, 𝜙 ) = 2𝜌 sin 𝜙. (22) These modes represent wavefront slopes in the two orthogonal direc-tions and therefore shift the PSF centroid. In practice, however, the same effect can be implemented more simply by directly shifting the monochromatic PSF in the image plane by the predicted amounts Δ𝑥 

and Δ𝑦 . We adopt that approach in the image simulations discussed later. The important point is that the two descriptions are equivalent and both represent a wavelength-dependent displacement of the PSF centroid. 

2.3 Roman optical specifications 

To evaluate the formalism above for the Roman WFI, we use the instrument-specific quantities summarized in Table 1. These include the focal ratio, the meniscus-filter geometry, the distances between the pupil, filter, and focal plane, the focal-plane orientation, and the quantities used to convert detector position into angle of incidence at the filter. 4 Together with the wavelength-dependent refractive index of the filter substrate, these are the Roman -specific inputs needed to calculate the lateral and longitudinal chromatic shifts. For the Roman WFI filters, we are primarily interested in shifts    

> 4Some optical design parameters can be found directly in https://roman. gsfc.nasa.gov/science/WFI_technical.html or in Pasquale et al. (2018). Parameters not found explicitly stated can be derived from what is in Pasquale et al. (2018).

measured relative to the effective wavelength of each bandpass, 𝜆 eff ,since broadband PSF differences depend on how the monochromatic PSFs vary across the filter relative to that wavelength. Unless other-wise stated, we therefore use the shorthand Δ𝑥 (𝜆 ), Δ𝑦 (𝜆 ), and Δ𝑧 (𝜆 )

to denote shifts defined relative to the effective wavelength of the corresponding filter. The WFI filters are weak meniscus elements made of Suprasil 3001 fused silica (Cromey et al. 2023), with the center bulging to-ward the incoming beam. The wavelength-dependent refractive index 

𝑛 (𝜆 ) is calculated using the Sellmeier coefficients provided by the manufacturer. 5 Fig. 3 shows the refractive-index data together with the corresponding Sellmeier fit over the wavelength range spanned by the Roman imaging bandpasses. The figure also shows that different filters sample different parts of the refractive-index curve. In partic-ular, the slope of 𝑛 (𝜆 ) is steeper over the wavelength range of R062 than over most of the redder imaging bands, while W146 spans a much broader wavelength range, both of which suggest a potentially enhanced chromatic refraction effect. An additional Roman -specific ingredient is the position of the focal plane relative to the filter. The focal plane is not exactly parallel to the local filter surface across the field, so the effective filter-to-focal-plane distance varies slightly with position. We account for this by modifying the nominal distance as 𝐿 eff = 𝐿 − 𝑦 FPA tan 𝜃 FPA , where 

𝑦 FPA is the focal-plane position in the direction of the tilt and 𝜃 FPA is the inclination angle of the focal plane relative to the filter. The angle of incidence used in the formalism is determined from the Roman focal-plane geometry. For a given sensor chip assem-   

> 5See https://www.heraeus-covantics.com/media/Media/ Documents/Products_and_Solutions/OPT/EN/Data_and_ Properties_Optics_fused_silica_EN.pdf
> MNRAS 000 , 1–19 (2026)

# Filter Refraction 7                

> Table 1. Roman WFI quantities used in the filter-substrate refraction model. The table lists the Roman -specific inputs substituted into the general formal-ism of Sec. 2.2, including the meniscus-filter geometry, the distances relevant for ray propagation, the focal-plane orientation, and the quantities used to convert detector position into angle of incidence at the filter. Quantity Value Focal ratio ( 𝑁 )8
> Central filter thickness ( 𝑡 )10 mm
> Inner surface ROC ( 𝑅 1)−1.5 m
> Outer surface ROC ( 𝑅 2)−1.4993 m
> Exit pupil to filter distance ( 𝑠 )10 mm
> Filter to focal plane distance ( 𝐿 )0.673 m
> Relative focal-plane inclination ( 𝜃 FPA )13 .2◦
> Pixel size 10 𝜇 m
> Plate scale 0.11 arcsec /pixel
> Pupil demagnification ( 𝑀 pup )26 .8

bly (SCA) and detector position, we first convert the science-frame pixel coordinates to local focal-plane coordinates (𝑥 FPA , 𝑦 FPA ) using 

pysiaf 6 (Sahlmann et al. 2019). These coordinates are then mapped to an incidence angle at the filter using the nominal WFI plate scale, pixel size, and the demagnification between the focal plane and the exit pupil. Denoting by 𝐶 the conversion from focal-plane distance in mm to incidence angle in degrees, and by 𝑀 pup the pupil demag-nification factor (the ratio of the entrance pupil diameter to the exit pupil diameter), the total angle of incidence is 

𝜃 =√︃ 𝑥 2FPA + 𝑦 2FPA 𝐶 𝑀 pup , (23) with components 

𝜃 𝑥 = 𝑥 FPA 𝐶 𝑀 pup , 𝜃 𝑦 = 𝑦 FPA 𝐶 𝑀 pup . (24) For the Roman WFI, the values entering 𝐶 are the pixel size (10 𝜇 m) and plate scale ( 0.11 arcsec /pixel ). We adopt 𝑀 pup ≈ 26 .8,obtained from the average pupil demagnification (along the FPA x-axis) across the field of view in the full ray-tracing model described in Sec. 4.1. Strictly speaking, the pupil is not perfectly circular and the demagnification varies across the field of view, so treating it as a single constant is an approximation adopted for simplicity. Across the field, this prescription gives angles of incidence reaching up to 

∼ 12 ◦ near the edges of the focal plane. Finally, we neglect the temperature dependence of the refrac-tive index in the present analysis. Using the manufacturer-provided temperature-dependent information, we verified that the resulting change in 𝑛 (𝜆 ) over the relevant wavelength range is at the sub-percent level, so the room-temperature Sellmeier coefficients are sufficient for measuring the chromatic effects. 

3 SIMULATIONS 

In this section, we describe how the refraction formalism developed above is incorporated into Roman PSF image simulations. The goal is to use the wavelength-dependent lateral and longitudinal shifts introduced in Sec. 2 to build a practical implementation that can be used to generate perturbed broadband PSFs and to quantify their im-pact on observable image properties. Since the effect is intrinsically  

> 6https://github.com/spacetelescope/pysiaf

chromatic, the implementation must account for how the monochro-matic PSF varies across the bandpass and how the refraction-induced aberrations modify that wavelength dependence. We begin by describing how the baseline Roman PSF is drawn and how the effective broadband PSF is constructed from monochro-matic realizations across the filter bandpass. We then show how the predicted chromatic shifts are introduced into the PSF. This provides the simulation framework used in the following sections to validate the formalism and measure the resulting PSF and photometry errors. 

3.1 Drawing the Roman PSF 

We generate the PSF image simulations using GalSim v2.6 (Rowe et al. 2015). In particular, we use the Roman module 7 (Kannawadi et al. 2016), which provides PSF models and instrument character-istics specific to the Roman telescope. Throughout this work, this built-in Roman PSF model serves as the baseline onto which we later add the chromatic aberrations induced by filter-substrate refraction. Within GalSim , the Roman PSF is constructed from tabulated Zernike coefficients for each SCA, derived from available Cycle 9 design data 8 and provided at the center and corners of each detector. For an arbitrary position within an SCA, GalSim interpolates these coefficients to obtain the local aberration model used to draw the PSF. The underlying Zernike coefficients are defined at a fixed ref-erence wavelength of 1293 nm , which should not be confused with the bandpass effective wavelength used in the previous section when defining the chromatic shifts Δ𝑥 , Δ𝑦 , and Δ𝑧 . When a PSF is re-quested at wavelength 𝜆 , GalSim internally rescales the aberration amplitudes from this Roman -model reference wavelength to 𝜆 , so any additional aberration coefficients introduced later must be specified consistently with this normalization. We are interested in the effective PSF through a bandpass. For a source with spectral energy distribution 𝑆 (𝜆 ) observed through a filter with transmission 𝑇 (𝜆 ), the normalized effective broadband PSF is 

PSF eff (x) =

∫ d𝜆 𝑆 (𝜆 ) 𝑇 (𝜆 ) PSF (x; 𝜆 )

∫ d𝜆 𝑆 (𝜆 ) 𝑇 (𝜆 ) , (25) where PSF (x; 𝜆 ) is the PSF at focal-plane position x and wavelength 

𝜆 . Because the filter-substrate refraction derived in the previous sec-tion is explicitly wavelength dependent, the perturbation must be applied before integrating over the bandpass. We therefore construct the broadband PSF manually, wavelength by wavelength. In practice, we approximate Equation (25) on a discrete wave-length grid {𝜆 𝑖 } spanning the filter bandpass. At each wavelength 𝜆 𝑖 ,we generate a monochromatic Roman PSF at the chosen SCA and detector position, convolve it with the native Roman pixel response, and draw it at the desired pixel scale. The resulting broadband PSF is 

PSF (x) =

Í𝑖 𝑤 𝑖 PSF (x; 𝜆 𝑖 )

Í𝑖 𝑤 𝑖 

, (26) with weights 

𝑤 𝑖 = 𝑆 (𝜆 𝑖 ) 𝑇 (𝜆 𝑖 ) Δ𝜆 𝑖 , (27) where Δ𝜆 𝑖 is the wavelength-bin width. After summation, the PSF is normalized to unit flux.     

> 7https://galsim-developers.github.io/GalSim/_build/html/ roman.html
> 8see https://science.nasa.gov/mission/ roman-space-telescope/wfi-technical/
> MNRAS 000 , 1–19 (2026)

# 8 F. Berlfein et al. 

Constructing the broadband PSF therefore requires a source SED. Since the PSF model will ultimately be used for galaxy shape mea-surements, we adopt an average galaxy SED built from the Diffsky 

(Hearin et al. 2020) mock extragalactic catalogs used in the Ope-nUniverse 2024 image simulations (OpenUniverse et al. 2025). We apply a true magnitude cut of 𝐻 < 25 to the catalog to remove galaxies that would generally be too faint for Roman weak lensing cosmology(see Berlfein et al. 2026). For each mock galaxy, we sum the bulge, disk, and knot SED components, redshift the total SED according to the catalog redshift, and normalize it by its integrated flux through the Roman Y106 bandpass. We then compute an av-erage observed galaxy SED weighted by the Roman source redshift distribution, 𝑛 (𝑧 ), adopted in Roman ’s High-Latitude Imaging Sur-vey (HLIS) Data Challenge 1 9 (J. Xu et al. in preparation), across all redshift bins. This 𝑛 (𝑧 )-weighted mean template is used throughout this work as the source SED 𝑆 (𝜆 ).We verify that the discrete approximation in Equation (26) is con-sistent with GalSim ’s native chromatic FFT-based drawing. To do so, we generate two broadband PSFs for each filter: one using the manual wavelength-by-wavelength summation in Equation (26), and one using the built-in GalSim chromatic object. In order to quantify the agreement between the two PSF drawing methods, we com-pare the PSF sizes using the HSM adaptive moments (Hirata & Seljak 2003; Mandelbaum et al. 2005) module implemented in GalSim . The agreement will depend on the particular wavelength sampling chosen for the manual summation. Hence, we chose the wavelength sampling empirically such that the fractional size difference between the man-ual and native GalSim PSFs is below 10 −4, which is much lower than the 7.2 × 10 −4 HLIS requirement. We find that this criterion is satisfied with a uniformly spaced wavelength grid of 20 samples span-ning the full bandpass of each filter, except for W146, which needed 40 samples to account for its broader wavelength coverage. This confirms that the manual wavelength-by-wavelength approximation reproduces the GalSim chromatic PSF to sufficient accuracy while providing the flexibility needed to introduce wavelength-dependent aberrations. Because the Roman PSF is undersampled at the native pixel scale, accurate measurements of PSF size and shape require a finer pixel grid. Throughout this work, we therefore draw the PSF at a pixel length eight times smaller than the native Roman pixel length (similar to that in Cao et al. 2025) when making quantitative measurements. For qualitative checks and visualization, however, we also render PSFs at the native pixel scale, since that is the scale at which the effect will ultimately appear in the individual Roman images. It is important to note that in practice, galaxy shape measurements for Ro-man will eventually be made on coadded oversampled images (Hirata et al. 2024), while PSF modeling will be performed on individual exposures. 

3.2 Introducing new aberrations 

We now describe how the wavelength-dependent refraction terms are incorporated into the manual PSF construction. For each wavelength 

𝜆 𝑖 in the grid, we first evaluate the predicted chromatic shifts Δ𝑥 (𝜆 𝑖 ),

Δ𝑦 (𝜆 𝑖 ), and Δ𝑧 (𝜆 𝑖 ) relative to the bandpass effective wavelength, using the formalism described in Sec. 2.2. These shifts are then used to modify the monochromatic Roman PSF before it is inserted into the weighted broadband sum. In this implementation, the longitudinal  

> 9https://github.com/CosmoLike/roman_cpip_data_challenge

and lateral terms can be enabled independently, allowing us to study the effects of defocus and decentering separately. The longitudinal shift Δ𝑧 (𝜆 𝑖 ) is implemented as an additional defocus aberration to the existing fourth Zernike aberration in the 

Roman PSF model. For each wavelength, we convert the predicted axial shift into a Noll 𝑍 4 coefficient using the defocus relation de-rived in Sec.2.2.4. In practice, this coefficient is supplied through the extra_aberrations argument of roman.getPSF , with only the defocus component modified. The normalization is expressed in units consistent with the fixed Roman PSF reference wavelength of 

1293 nm , which is the wavelength at which the underlying GalSim 

Roman aberration model is defined. Thus, when the longitudinal term is enabled, each monochromatic PSF is redrawn with a wavelength-dependent additional defocus coefficient. The lateral shifts Δ𝑥 (𝜆 𝑖 ) and Δ𝑦 (𝜆 𝑖 ) are implemented as wavelength-dependent decentering terms. Although these shifts can be interpreted formally as tip and tilt Zernike modes, the roman mod-ule within GalSim does not currently allow these Zernike coefficients to be modified. We therefore do not introduce the effect through ad-ditional Zernike terms. Instead, after generating the monochromatic PSF object, we apply the predicted displacement directly through the GalSim shift operation. In other words, before drawing, the monochromatic PSF at wavelength 𝜆 𝑖 is translated by the amounts 

Δ𝑥 (𝜆 𝑖 ) and Δ𝑦 (𝜆 𝑖 ). Note that the galsim.shift operation expects its arguments in units of arcsec, so these shifts must be converted appropriately before being passed in. The final broadband PSF is obtained by inserting these perturbed monochromatic PSFs into the weighted sum of Equation (26). The main steps of this procedure are summarized in Algorithm 1. 

Algorithm 1 Adding filter-substrate refraction to the Roman PSF 

Require: wavelength grid {𝜆 𝑖 }, filter transmission 𝑇 (𝜆 ), SED 𝑆 (𝜆 ),focal plane position x 

> 1:

Initialize PSF (x) ← 0 

> 2:

for each wavelength sample 𝜆 𝑖 do  

> 3:

Set and store 𝑤 𝑖 (𝜆 ) ← 𝑆 (𝜆 𝑖 ) 𝑇 (𝜆 𝑖 ) Δ𝜆 𝑖  

> 4:

Compute Δ𝑥 (𝜆 𝑖 ), Δ𝑦 (𝜆 𝑖 ), and Δ𝑧 (𝜆 𝑖 ) 

> 5:

if defocus is enabled then  

> 6:

Convert Δ𝑧 (𝜆 𝑖 ) into defocus coefficient 𝑎 4 (𝜆 𝑖 ) 

> 7:

Store monochromatic PSF (x; 𝜆 𝑖 ) from galsim.roman 

with 𝑎 4 (𝜆 𝑖 ) as additional aberration in the fourth Zernike  

> 8:

end if  

> 9:

if decentering is enabled then  

> 10:

Store monochromatic PSF (x; 𝜆 𝑖 ) from galsim.roman  

> 11:

Shift the PSF center by Δ𝑥 (𝜆 𝑖 ) and Δ𝑦 (𝜆 𝑖 ) 

> 12:

end if  

> 13:

Update PSF (x) ← PSF (x) + 𝑤 𝑖 PSF (x; 𝜆 𝑖 ) 

> 14:

end for  

> 15:

Normalize PSF (x) by Í𝑖 𝑤 𝑖  

> 16:

return PSF (x)

3.3 Ray tracing 

To validate the analytic predictions from Sec. 2, we compare them against measurements from a geometric ray-tracing model of the full 

Roman WFI optical system using PSFSim 10 . PSFSim uses instru-  

> 10 https://github.com/Roman-HLIS-Cosmology-PIT/PSFSim/ tree/main
> MNRAS 000 , 1–19 (2026)

# Filter Refraction 9                                

> Figure 4. Comparison of the analytic predictions for the chromatic lateral and longitudinal shifts with measurements from the full Roman ray-tracing model, evaluated at the blue edge of each filter relative to the filter effective wavelength, i.e. Δ𝑥 (𝜆 blue ;𝜆 eff ),Δ𝑦 (𝜆 blue ;𝜆 eff ), and Δ𝑧 (𝜆 blue ;𝜆 eff ). The top panels show the predicted shifts (solid lines) and ray-traced values (dashed lines) as a function of incidence angle; the bottom panels show the corresponding residuals. The values are computed at the centers of the 18 Roman SCAs for all eight imaging bands. Because of the focal-plane symmetry, distinct SCA centers can have the same projected incidence angle in a given direction, so multiple points for the same filter may overlap. For the lateral shifts (left and middle panels), the agreement is very good across the focal plane, with residuals generally below ∼0.03 𝜇 mfor most bands and reaching at most ∼0.05 𝜇 mfor W146, far smaller than the Roman pixel size of 10 𝜇 m. The longitudinal shifts (right panel) are accurate to the ∼10% level in the worst cases, with a slight tendency for the analytic model to overestimate the ray-traced value. Although the accuracy of the longitudinal shifts is harder to interpret directly, subsequent figures show that the PSF effects they induce are subdominant. Overall, the analytic prescription captures the main trends and amplitudes of the chromatic shifts across the Roman focal plane very well.

mental specifications as provided by the Roman project 11 to follow light rays as they reflect, refract, and intersect with the various optical components within the telescope, including the mirrors, baffles, and the filter wheel. The resultant PSF is therefore drawn with a fully spatially dependent pupil mask at a desired wavelength. The optical path differences are also interpolated at the focal plane from the same Cycle 9 design data as those in GalSim . At a given field point, the raytrace module returns the ray coordinates, directions, and values of the electric field at the focal plane, which are used to measure the chromatic lateral and longitudinal shifts: Δ𝑥 , Δ𝑦 , Δ𝑧 . PSFSim has been validated by comparing the PSFs drawn at different focal plane positions and in different bands against those generated by the Space Telescope Point Spread Function (STPSF) 12 , a Python package ca-pable of computing the simulated Roman PSF and in part developed by the Roman Science Operations Center. The excellent agreement between the polychromatic PSFs suggests that the ray tracing per-formed through the optical model in PSFSim is accurate. A detailed description of PSFSim is presented in Dalal et al. (in preparation).   

> 11 RST-SYS-SPEC-0055, Revision E
> 12 https://github.com/spacetelescope/stpsf

4 RESULTS 

In this section, we present the main results obtained by applying the refraction formalism to the image simulations. We first test the phys-ical accuracy of the analytic model by comparing its predictions for the chromatic lateral and longitudinal shifts against measurements from a full Roman ray-tracing calculation. We then use the validated model to quantify how these shifts propagate into observable PSF and photometric errors across the Roman focal plane and imaging bands. This allows us to assess both whether the simplified geo-metric treatment captures the dominant behavior of filter-substrate refraction and whether the resulting perturbations are large enough to matter for Roman science applications, particularly weak lensing and photometry. 

4.1 Comparison with ray tracing 

To validate the analytic predictions from Sec. 2, we compare them against measurements from PSFSim . For each field point the ray tracer returns the ray coordinates and direction at the focal plane, which we use to measure the chromatic lateral and longitudinal shifts, 

Δ𝑥, Δ𝑦, Δ𝑧 .We perform this comparison at the blue edge of each filter band-pass, where the effect is largest, for all eight Roman imaging bands: R062, Z087, Y106, J129, H158, F184, K213, and W146. At each  

> MNRAS 000 , 1–19 (2026)

# 10 F. Berlfein et al.      

> Figure 5. Example broadband Roman PSF for an average galaxy SED (see Sec. 3.1) in H158 and the corresponding image residuals induced by the two filter-substrate refraction effects: decentering and defocus. For visualization, the PSF shown is located at the edge of the focal plane, where the effect is largest. The left column shows the nominal PSF with no added refraction-induced aberrations, while the middle and right columns show the residuals obtained after adding only the wavelength-dependent decentering or defocus term, respectively, and subtracting the nominal PSF. The top row shows the oversampled PSF, drawn at a pixel scale 8 times smaller than the native Roman scale, and the bottom row shows the same quantities at the native detector scale. The residual patterns match the expected qualitative behavior of the two perturbations: decentering produces a dipole-like residual from a wavelength-dependent shift of the PSF centroid, while defocus produces a more radially symmetric residual from a wavelength-dependent shift in the best-focus position. The color scales also show that the decentering residuals are roughly two orders of magnitude larger than the defocus residuals at the pixel level, indicating that the lateral component dominates the broadband PSF distortion.

SCA center, we trace a pupil-sampled ray bundle with 𝑁 = 384 

rays per dimension ( 384 × 384 total rays) at both 𝜆 blue and 𝜆 eff . The lateral shifts are measured directly from the change in the average focal-plane position of the ray bundle, providing a direct test of the chief-ray approximation used in Sec. 2.2. The longitudinal shift is measured from the change in the best-focus plane of the traced bundle. Starting from the ray positions and slopes at the focal plane, we propagate the rays by a small axial displacement Δ𝑧 ,

𝑥 ′ 

> 𝑖

= 𝑥 𝑖 + 𝑢 𝑖 Δ𝑧, 𝑦 ′ 

> 𝑖

= 𝑦 𝑖 + 𝑣 𝑖 Δ𝑧, (28) where 𝑖 indexes rays in the bundle, and 𝑢 𝑖 and 𝑣 𝑖 denote the ray slopes in the 𝑥 and 𝑦 directions, respectively. We then determine the value of Δ𝑧 that minimizes the weighted second moment of the propagated bundle, 

𝑆 (Δ𝑧 ) =∑︁ 

> 𝑖

𝑤 𝑖 

h 𝑥 ′ 

> 𝑖

− ¯𝑥 ′ 2 +  𝑦 ′ 

> 𝑖

− ¯𝑦 ′ 2 i

=∑︁ 

> 𝑖

𝑤 𝑖 

(𝑥 𝑖 − ¯𝑥 + ( 𝑝 𝑖 − ¯𝑝 )Δ𝑧 )2 + ( 𝑦 𝑖 − ¯𝑦 + ( 𝑞 𝑖 − ¯𝑞 )Δ𝑧 )2  ,

(29) here 𝑤 𝑖 is unity for unmasked rays and zero otherwise, and barred quantities denote weighted means over the ray bundle. Defining 

˜𝑥 𝑖 = 𝑥 𝑖 − ¯𝑥, ˜𝑦 𝑖 = 𝑦 𝑖 − ¯𝑦, ˜𝑝 𝑖 = 𝑝 𝑖 − ¯𝑝, ˜𝑞 𝑖 = 𝑞 𝑖 − ¯𝑞, (30) the minimizing value is 

Δ𝑧 best = −

Í𝑖 𝑤 𝑖 ( ˜𝑥 𝑖 ˜𝑝 𝑖 + ˜𝑦 𝑖 ˜𝑞 𝑖 )

Í𝑖 𝑤 𝑖 

 ˜𝑝 2 

> 𝑖

+ ˜𝑞 2

> 𝑖

 . (31) The chromatic longitudinal shift is then the difference between the best-focus positions measured at the two wavelengths. This geometric definition is equivalent to the wavefront-based description in Sec. 2.2.4, where the lateral shifts are encoded in the linear OPD terms and the longitudinal shift in the quadratic defocus term. We verified that the shifts measured from the ray bundle agree to sub-percent level with those obtained from independently fitting the OPD. Fig. 4 compares the ray-traced and analytic shifts across the focal plane as a function of incidence angle. As expected in the paraxial approximation, the lateral shifts scale linearly with incidence angle (Δ𝑥 ∝ 𝜃 𝑥 and Δ𝑦 ∝ 𝜃 𝑦 ). The analytic model reproduces the ray-traced lateral shifts to within 0.03 𝜇 m for all bands except W146, where the agreement is within 0.05 𝜇 m. Given the Roman pixel scale of 10 𝜇 m, even the largest lateral residuals are smaller than ∼ 1/200 

of a pixel. The longitudinal shifts are reproduced less precisely: in the largest-residual cases, the analytic model agrees with the ray tracing at roughly the 10% level and tends to slightly overestimate the shift. This is nevertheless sufficient, since the longitudinal contribution is subdominant in the PSF results shown in Sec. 4.2. The field depen-dence of Δ𝑧 is driven mainly by the inclination of the focal plane relative to the filters, which changes the filter-to-detector distance across the field. The remaining residuals shown in the right panel of Fig. 4 likely arise from the two-ray approximation of the full ray bundle used in the analytic model. This approximation does not fully capture all factors that affect the best-focus position, such as the aberrated structure of the ray bundle before it reaches the filter. Overall, Fig. 4 shows that the simplified geometric prescription  

> MNRAS 000 , 1–19 (2026)

# Filter Refraction 11                

> Figure 6. Filter dependence of the PSF residuals induced by filter-substrate refraction for an average galaxy SED, shown separately for the wavelength-dependent defocus term (blue) and decentering term (orange). The three columns show, from left to right, the absolute fractional error in the trace of the PSF second moments, |𝛿𝑇 /𝑇 |, and the absolute ellipticity residuals, |𝛿𝑒 1|and |𝛿𝑒 2|. The error bars indicate the 16th–84th percentile range of the residuals across the focal plane. In each top panel, the solid lines show the root-mean-square (RMS) of the residual over the full focal plane, while the dotted lines show the maximum residual. The bottom row shows the same quantities divided by the corresponding Roman science requirement. The horizontal dashed line in the top row marks the requirement itself, while the dashed line in the bottom row marks one third of the requirement, which we use as an approximate per-systematic allocation threshold. The shaded vertical band highlights the weak lensing filters: Y106, J129, and H158. Across all PSF diagnostics, the decentering contribution is more than an order of magnitude larger than the defocus contribution, demonstrating that the lateral chromatic shift is the dominant source of PSF error from filter-substrate refraction. In the weak lensing bands, the defocus contribution remains below one third of the requirement for all three diagnostics, while the decentering contribution largely exceeds the Roman weak lensing PSF size and shape requirements.

captures the main trends and amplitudes of the chromatic shifts across the Roman focal plane without requiring full ray tracing at every position and wavelength. 

4.2 PSF and flux errors 

To quantify the impact of filter-substrate refraction on observable image properties, we evaluate the simulated Roman PSF over the full focal plane and in all imaging bands. Specifically, we consider all 18 SCAs and all 8 Roman filters, and on each SCA sample 100 positions arranged on a 10 ×10 linearly spaced grid. At every sampled position, we generate three PSF realizations using the procedure described in Sec. 3: (i) a reference PSF with no refraction-induced aberrations added, (ii) a PSF including only the lateral shifts, and (iii) a PSF including only the longitudinal shifts. Treating the two effects separately allows us to isolate the relative importance of decentering and defocus. Fig. 5 shows an example of the broadband PSF image residuals for the decentering and defocus contributions separately. In both cases, the residual pattern matches the expected qualitative behavior of the corresponding aberration: the defocus residual is approximately ra-dially symmetric, while the decentering residual shows the expected dipole-like pattern from the wavelength-dependent displacement of the PSF centroid. The relative amplitudes are also clear from the color scale, with the decentering residual roughly two orders of magnitude larger than the defocus residual at the pixel level. We now turn to quantitative diagnostics relevant for weak lensing and photometric measurements. Differences in PSF size and ellip-ticity are directly relevant for weak lensing applications (see, e.g., Jarvis et al. 2021; Schutt et al. 2025), where biases in the modeled PSF can propagate into shear measurements (Mandelbaum 2018). Mismatches between the true PSF and the PSF used in model fitting can also bias flux estimates, which is relevant for stellar, galaxy, and supernova photometry (Astier et al. 2013; Jiménez-Teja et al. 2015; Lee et al. 2023). Here we evaluate the induced flux error only for point-source estimates; for extended sources the result would also depend on the galaxy surface brightness profiles and the chosen photometric estimator, which is beyond the scope of this work. PSF size residuals are quantified in terms of the fractional differ-ence in the trace of the PSF second moments (Hirata & Seljak 2003), 

Δ𝑇 𝑇 = 𝑇 ab − 𝑇 0

𝑇 0

, (32) where 𝑇 ≡ 𝐼 𝑥 𝑥 + 𝐼 𝑦𝑦 , 𝑇 0 is measured from the reference PSF, and 𝑇 ab 

from the PSF with either the lateral or longitudinal aberration added. The second moments are defined as 

𝐼 𝑖 𝑗 =

∫

𝑥 𝑖 𝑥 𝑗 𝑤 (x) 𝐼 (x) 𝑑 2𝑥, (33)  

> MNRAS 000 , 1–19 (2026)

# 12 F. Berlfein et al.    

> Figure 7. Similar to Fig. 6 but for the point-source flux residuals. The de-centering contribution is still much larger than the defocus contribution, but in this case residuals are within one third of 1% flux requirement for both effects in most bands. The only exceptions are the R062 and W146 bands for decentering, where flux residuals hover around or exceed the requirement.

where 𝑥 𝑖 ∈ { 𝑥, 𝑦 }, 𝐼 (x) is the PSF intensity profile, and 𝑤 (x) is a Gaussian weight function normalized such that ∫ 𝑤 (x) 𝐼 (x) 𝑑 2𝑥 = 1.For the PSF shape, we use the two distortion components 

𝑒 1 = 𝐼 𝑥 𝑥 − 𝐼 𝑦𝑦 

𝐼 𝑥 𝑥 + 𝐼 𝑦𝑦 

, 𝑒 2 = 2𝐼 𝑥 𝑦 

𝐼 𝑥 𝑥 + 𝐼 𝑦𝑦 

, (34) and define the corresponding residuals 

Δ𝑒 1 = 𝑒 1,ab − 𝑒 1,0, Δ𝑒 2 = 𝑒 2,ab − 𝑒 2,0, (35) where 𝑒 1 describes ellipticity along the detector 𝑥 - and 𝑦 -axes and 

𝑒 2 along axes rotated by 45 ◦. The PSF size and shape are measured using adaptive moments with GalSim ’s HSM module. For point-source photometry, we treat the PSF with the added aberration as the observed image and fit it using the unperturbed PSF as the model template. For a noiseless point source, the best-fit flux from least-squares matching (Lee et al. 2023) is 

ˆ𝑓 =

Í𝑖 𝑗 𝐼 𝑖 𝑗 𝑃 𝑖 𝑗 

Í𝑖 𝑗 𝑃 2

> 𝑖 𝑗

, (36) where 𝐼 𝑖 𝑗 is the perturbed image and 𝑃 𝑖 𝑗 is the template PSF evaluated in pixel 𝑖 𝑗 . We then define the fractional flux residual as 

Δ𝐹 𝐹 = ˆ𝑓 − 𝑓 0

𝑓 0

, (37) where 𝑓 0 is the true input flux, equal to 1 by construction in our simulations. This test should be interpreted as a simple point-source diagnostic of PSF mismatch rather than as a direct prediction for galaxy photometry. 

4.2.1 Filter dependence 

We begin by examining how the PSF size, shape, and point-source flux residuals vary across the Roman imaging bands. Since the rel-evant requirements are formulated in terms of root-mean-square (RMS) residuals, we compute the RMS of Δ𝑇 /𝑇 , Δ𝑒 1, Δ𝑒 2, and 

Δ𝐹 /𝐹 across the full focal plane, and also track the maximum resid-ual to quantify the worst-case behavior. Figure 6 shows the PSF size and shape residuals for all eight bands. The clearest result is that decentering is the dominant contri-bution: across all three PSF diagnostics, its residuals are more than an order of magnitude larger than those from defocus. This is con-sistent with the pixel-level differences shown in Fig. 5, where the decentering residuals are also approximately two orders of magni-tude larger than those from defocus. To place these results in context, we compare them to the Roman HLIS requirements from Kruk et al. (2023), namely 7.2 × 10 −4 for the fractional error in the trace of the second moments and 5.7 × 10 −4 for each ellipticity component. The lower panels show each metric normalized by its requirement, with a horizontal line at one third of the requirement, a commonly used approximate per-systematic allocation when independent sys-tematics are added in quadrature (The LSST Dark Energy Science Collaboration et al. 2018). This more stringent reference on indi-vidual systematics is motivated by the fact that multiple effects lead to PSF errors and therefore contribute to the total PSF error bud-get. These PSF requirements are most directly relevant for the weak lensing bands Y106, J129, and H158. For the defocus contribution, the RMS residual remains below one third of the requirement for all three PSF diagnostics in the weak lensing bands, and even the worst-case focal-plane regions remain below this threshold. The RMS exceeds one third of the requirement only for the PSF size and shape residuals in R062 and W146, which are not part of the baseline weak lensing analysis. We therefore conclude that the longitudinal component of filter-substrate refraction is negligible for weak lensing shape measurement in the baseline Roman bands. The decentering contribution is very different. In the weak lensing bands, the RMS PSF size residual is typically 0.3–0.4% , exceeding 

1% in the outer part of the focal plane, and the corresponding ellip-ticity residuals are likewise well above the systematic error budget. Thus, the lateral chromatic shift exceeds the allowed PSF size and shape errors by nearly an order of magnitude and is clearly relevant for weak lensing analyses. The effect is even larger in R062 and W146, where the PSF size residual reaches the 2–3% level. The point-source flux residuals are shown separately in Fig. 7. Us-ing the 1% Roman point-source photometric requirement from Kruk et al. (2023), which is primarily motivated by the need for accurate fluxes for photometric redshift estimation, we again find that de-centering dominates over defocus. For most bands, the decentering-induced flux bias remains below one third of the requirement, with only the worst-case regions approaching that level. In R062 and W146, however, the RMS flux residual reaches the requirement and the worst cases exceed it, indicating that filter-substrate refraction can become relevant for point-source photometry in these bands. Since a similar 1% requirement also applies to the Roman High Lat-itude Time Domain Survey, these results might also be relevant for supernova cosmology. Finally, although W146 is not part of the baseline Roman weak lensing strategy, several papers have proposed using it to increase the depth of a wide-area survey (see Eifler et al. 2021; Eifler et al. 2023; von der Linden et al. 2023; Eifler et al. 2024). Our results highlight one of the challenges of precision shape measurement in  

> MNRAS 000 , 1–19 (2026)

# Filter Refraction 13                     

> Figure 8. Spatial dependence of the dominant decentering contribution to the PSF residuals for an average galaxy SED across the full Roman focal plane, shown here for the H158 filter. The two panels show the absolute fractional PSF size residual, 𝛿𝑇 /𝑇 , and the absolute PSF ellipticity residual, 𝛿𝑒 =√︃ 𝛿𝑒 21+𝛿𝑒 22,evaluated on a 10 ×10 grid of positions within each of the 18 SCAs. In the ellipticity panel, the whiskers indicate the direction of the ellipticity residual vector. In both cases, the residuals are smallest near the center of the focal plane and increase smoothly toward the outer SCAs, reaching their largest values near the field edges and corners. This behavior follows directly from the geometric origin of the effect: the angle of incidence at the filter increases with distance from the focal-plane center (shown as the red plus sign), so the wavelength-dependent lateral shifts, and hence the decentering-induced PSF errors, also grow toward larger field angles. The ellipticity residuals also show a highly coherent pattern, with an approximately radial alignment relative to the field center. The figure illustrates that the dominant PSF impact of filter-substrate refraction is not only large in magnitude, but also highly field dependent and spatially coherent across the Roman focal plane.
> Figure 9. Similar to Fig. 8 but for the point-source flux residuals. As we can see, the flux residual closely tracking the spatial pattern of the PSF size residual, as expected for point-source photometry based on PSF fitting. For the H158 band, flux residuals can reach ∼0.4% towards the edges of the focal plane.

such a broad filter: chromatic effects that are negligible in narrower bands can become non-negligible in W146, while effects already relevant in the standard weak lensing bands can be amplified far beyond requirement levels. This adds to the concerns noted in the ROTAC recommendations (Roman Observations Time Allocation Committee & Core Community Survey Definition Committees 2025) and in previous work on chromatic diffraction effects (see Berlfein et al. 2025, 2026) about using W146 for weak lensing with Roman .

4.2.2 Spatial dependence 

We now turn to the spatial dependence of the effect. Given the results above, we focus on the dominant decentering contribution, using the H158 filter as a representative example since it enters all tiers of the HLIS. Fig. 8 shows the spatial dependence of the PSF size and ellipticity residuals induced by decentering across the full Roman 

focal plane. In both panels, the residuals are smallest near the center of the focal plane and increase smoothly toward the outer SCAs, reaching their largest values near the field edges and corners. The pattern is approximately radially symmetric, as expected from the geometric origin of the effect: the angle of incidence increases with distance from the focal-plane center, so the wavelength-dependent lateral shifts, and hence the decentering-induced PSF errors, also grow towards the edges of the focal plane. Small asymmetries are due to the intrinsic PSF variation across the focal plane. The ellipticity residuals in Fig. 8 are also highly coherent, with an approximately radial alignment relative to the field center. This shows that the induced anisotropy is not random from detector to detector, but instead follows the same underlying field dependence as the PSF size residuals. In other words, the lateral chromatic shift does not merely broaden the effective broadband PSF; it also induces a coherent, spatially varying anisotropy across the focal plane. The corresponding point-source flux residuals are shown sepa-rately in Fig. 9. These closely track the PSF size residuals across the field, as expected for PSF-fitting photometry since changes in the effective PSF width alter how the light is distributed across pixels  

> MNRAS 000 , 1–19 (2026)

# 14 F. Berlfein et al. 

and therefore bias the recovered flux. We find that the flux residuals vary coherently as we move towards the edges and corners of the focal plane, with errors as large as ∼ 0.4% . This level of flux resid-uals towards the edges of the focal plane might be more relevant for transient science, for which accurate flux measurements across the focal plane are more critical. Although not shown in the figure, we also find spatial dependence in the defocus contribution. In that case, the pattern is less controlled by incidence angle and more by the pre-existing detector-dependent aberration structure, since the same added defocus produces a larger change where the native defocus is already larger. Because this com-ponent is subdominant overall, we defer further discussion of its spatial dependence to Appendix A. 

4.2.3 SED dependence 

The PSF and flux errors shown in Sec. 4.2.1 and Sec. 4.2.2 are com-puted using the average galaxy SED described in Sec. 3.1. However, because the broadband PSF depends on the source SED, the resulting errors will also depend on this choice. To understand the sensitivity of our results to the assumed SED, we repeat the simulations and analysis in the weak lensing bands using two extreme cases: a high redshift ( 𝑧 ∼ 2.5) SED with a much steeper slope than the average galaxy SED across the Roman wavelengths, and a lower redshift (𝑧 ∼ 0.5) SED with a flatter slope across the same wavelengths. We then compare the resulting RMS and maximum PSF and flux resid-uals to those obtained with the average SED and find that they differ by at most 10% for the high-redshift SED and 5% for the low-redshift SED. Even for these extreme cases, this variation is much smaller than the spatial variation across the focal plane shown in Figs. 8 and 9. This indicates that the filter refraction residuals are much more sensitive to the focal-plane position than to the source SED, justifying our use of an average galaxy SED to quantify them. 

5 PRACTICAL IMPLEMENTATION IN LARGE-SCALE IMAGE SIMULATIONS 

The previous sections used GalSim ’s FFT-based drawing method to quantify the impact of filter-substrate refraction on the Roman 

PSF. That approach is well suited for small and controlled studies, since it allows the chromatic perturbation to be inserted explicitly at each wavelength before integrating over the bandpass. However, this manual wavelength-by-wavelength construction is not a practical ap-proach for large-scale image simulations, where one typically draws many objects over wide areas. In that regime, the computational cost of repeatedly generating and summing monochromatic PSFs across the bandpass becomes infeasible. Large-scale image simulations commonly rely on photon-shooting rather than FFT-based image drawing (e.g. Kitching et al. 2010; OpenUniverse et al. 2025). In GalSim , photon-shooting generates a Monte Carlo realization of the image by sampling photons from the surface-brightness profile of the object and then accumulating those photons onto the detector grid 13 . Photon operators can then modify quantities such as the photon positions, directions, or fluxes before the photons reach the detector plane and are binned into pixels. This provides a simple way to implement the chromatic shifts described   

> 13 See https://galsim-developers.github.io/GalSim/_build/ html/photon.html

in this work without the need to explicitly draw and sum many monochromatic PSFs as we did in the FFT procedure. Motivated by this, we implement the dominant refraction-induced effect—the lateral chromatic decentering—using a photon operator that directly fits within the photon-shooting framework. We do not include the defocus-like effect in this practical implementation, since the results in Sec. 4.2 showed that it is subdominant for point-source photometry in all bands and also subdominant for PSF size and shape in most bands, including the weak lensing bands. The goal of this section is therefore to implement a custom photon operator to apply the wavelength-dependent lateral shifts during photon-shooting and to verify that it reproduces a PSF with the same properties (size and shape) as that of the FFT-based method. 

5.1 Photon operator 

In GalSim , a photon operator is an object that acts directly on the sampled photons during photon-shooting. Rather than modifying the final rendered image, a photon operator changes the photon properties themselves—for example, their positions or directions—before they are accumulated onto the image grid. This makes photon operators a natural way of introducing instrumental effects within the photon-shooting framework. Our implementation is built around a custom GalSim photon op-erator that applies the predicted lateral chromatic shift according to each photon’s assigned wavelength. The wavelength of each photon is assigned statistically from the object’s SED and the filter throughput. For a photon of wavelength 𝜆 and incidence angle 𝜽 (xdet ), we first evaluate the geometric shifts, Δ𝑥 (𝜆 ), Δ𝑦 (𝜆 ), relative to the effective wavelength of the bandpass, using the same refraction formalism de-scribed in Sec. 2.2. These shifts are then converted into pixel units and applied to the photon positions (𝑥 𝑖 , 𝑦 𝑖 ):

𝑥 𝑖 → 𝑥 𝑖 + Δ𝑥 (𝜆 𝑖 ), 𝑦 𝑖 → 𝑦 𝑖 + Δ𝑦 (𝜆 𝑖 ). (38) Conceptually, this reproduces the same physical effect as in the FFT implementation, with photons at different wavelengths being dis-placed by different amounts. One important caveat, however, is that this is not exactly equivalent to the FFT approach described in Sec. 3. In the photon-shooting case, the photons being modified are sampled from the broadband profile after integration over the bandpass, so each photon represents a contribution to the broadband image rather than to the monochromatic image at its own wavelength. As a re-sult, one expects larger deviations between the photon-operator and FFT implementations in filters with stronger chromatic PSF varia-tion across the bandpass, such as the W146, or in filters where the refractive index changes more rapidly over the wavelength range of the band, such as the R062 filter. We note this statement also depends on how the wavelength grid is sampled for the FFT implementation. Hence, we use the same wavelength sampling for the FFT as de-scribed in Sec. 3.1, which closely approximates GalSim ’s internal chromatic drawing. 

5.2 Comparison with FFT 

To validate the photon-operator implementation, we compare it di-rectly to the FFT-based method described in Section 3, evaluating PSFs drawn with and without the added decentering effect across the 

Roman focal plane. For computational efficiency, we use a 5 × 5 grid of positions on each SCA, corresponding to 25 sampled positions per detector across all 18 SCAs. For the photon-shooting calculation, we draw the PSF 20 times using 5 million photons each and average the  

> MNRAS 000 , 1–19 (2026)

# Filter Refraction 15            

> Figure 10. Comparison of the practical photon-shooting implementation of the decentering effect with the FFT-based reference calculation for an average galaxy SED. The three columns show the differences between the photon-shooting and FFT implementations for the PSF size and shape diagnostics, namely
> |𝛿𝑇 phot /𝑇 |,|𝛿𝑒 phot 1|, and |𝛿𝑒 phot 2|. The lines, colors and panels are similar to those in Fig. 6. Overall, the agreement between the photon-shooting and FFT implementations is very good, with the RMS residuals in the weak lensing bands remaining well below one third of the requirement for all three diagnostics and the worst-case residuals staying at or around that level. The largest deviations occur in the R062 and W146 filters, where stronger chromatic variation across the bandpass makes the photon-operator approximation less exact. Nevertheless, the results show that the custom photon operator reproduces the dominant chromatic decentering effect with sufficient accuracy for large-scale Roman image simulations.

resulting moments to suppress Poisson noise, which we verified is sufficient to achieve convergence in the measured moments. To isolate differences arising from the chromatic decentering model rather than from intrinsic differences between the two ren-dering methods, we subtract the baseline no-aberration difference between photon-shooting and FFT. The resulting comparison diag-nostics are: 

Δ𝑇 phot 

𝑇 =



𝑇 phot dec − 𝑇 FFT dec 



−



𝑇 phot 0 − 𝑇 FFT 0



𝑇 FFT 0

, (39) 

Δ𝑒 phot  

> 𝑖

=



𝑒 phot  

> 𝑖, dec

− 𝑒 FFT 

> 𝑖, dec



−



𝑒 phot  

> 𝑖, 0

− 𝑒 FFT 

> 𝑖, 0



, 𝑖 ∈ { 1, 2}, (40) 

Δ𝐹 phot 

𝐹 =



𝐹 phot dec − 𝐹 FFT dec 



−



𝐹 phot 0 − 𝐹 FFT 0



𝐹 FFT dec 

, (41) where superscripts denote the drawing method and subscripts dec or 0 denote PSFs drawn with or without decentering. Note that in photon-shooting the pixel convolution is tied to the drawing scale, unlike the FFT method where the pixel response is applied separately. We therefore draw both versions at the same oversampled pixel scale without convolving by the native pixel response, applying the same approximation to both methods so that their relative agreement iso-lates the chromatic decentering model rather than pixel-convolution differences. The results are shown in Fig. 10. Overall, the agreement is very good: for most filters the RMS residuals in all three metrics remain comfortably below one third of the Roman requirement, while even the maximum residuals typically remain near or below this threshold. This is especially true in the weak lensing bands Y106, J129, and H158, where the RMS residuals in 𝛿𝑇 /𝑇 , 𝛿𝑒 1, and 𝛿𝑒 2 are all well below one third of the corresponding requirements and even the worst-case residuals remain at or around that level. These results confirm that the photon operator reproduces the dominant chromatic decentering effect to the accuracy needed for weak lensing image simulations in the baseline Roman bands. The largest deviations occur in R062 and W146, where the RMS residuals approach the requirement and the maximum residuals can exceed the one third-allocation line by a substantial margin. This is consistent with the caveat discussed in Sec. 5.1: the photon-operator approach is not exactly equivalent to the FFT implementation be-cause the photons being shifted are sampled from the broadband profile rather than from monochromatic PSFs before bandpass in-tegration, so discrepancies are expected to be larger in filters with stronger chromatic variation. This is the case for R062, where the refractive index varies more rapidly over the filter wavelength range, and for W146, whose very broad bandpass contains substantial PSF variation. Although not shown in Fig. 10, we also examined the point-source flux residuals. For all bands, including R062 and W146, the corre-sponding photon-shooting versus FFT differences remain well below the adopted photometric requirement. This indicates that, even where the agreement in PSF size and shape is less precise, the remaining differences are still small enough that the induced point-source pho-tometry mismatch is subdominant. These results, in combination with the validation described in Sec. 4, show that this implementation provides an accurate and prac-tical way to include the dominant filter-substrate refraction effect in photon-shooting simulations. In summary, we applied a two-step ver- 

> MNRAS 000 , 1–19 (2026)

# 16 F. Berlfein et al. 

ification process: the analytic chromatic shift approximation was first validated against ray tracing and then used to construct FFT-drawn PSFs that include the desired chromatic effect; the FFT-drawn PSFs were then compared to the photon-shooting PSFs, with both imple-mentations using the same analytic approximation, to validate the latter. We therefore conclude that the photon operator is sufficiently accurate for use in large-scale Roman image simulations, particularly for the baseline weak lensing bands where precise modeling of the decentering effect is most important. The photon operator introduced here is currently being incorpo-rated into the Roman image simulation package roman_imsim 14 ,which uses the GalSim configuration framework for large-scale im-age simulations of the Roman WFI instrument (e.g. OpenUniverse et al. 2025). 

6 CONCLUSION 

The Roman Space Telescope is designed to deliver high-precision measurements of weak gravitational lensing and large-scale struc-ture. This level of precision demands exceptional control of instru-mental systematics, particularly those that affect PSF modeling. One of these systematics comes from wavelength-dependent refraction in the Roman WFI filters, which can introduce perturbations to the PSF. This effect, currently absent from large-scale Roman image simula-tions, has not been independently quantified or studied for Roman . In this work, we quantified the impact of filter-substrate refraction on the Roman PSF and established a practical approach for including it in future image simulation efforts. We showed that filter-substrate refraction can be decomposed into two wavelength-dependent geometric quantities: a lateral chromatic shift, which displaces the image centroid in the focal plane as a func-tion of wavelength, and a longitudinal chromatic shift, which moves the location of best focus along the optical axis. We developed an analytic prescription for both quantities using Roman -specific optical parameters and validated it against a full WFI ray-tracing calcula-tion, then propagated the resulting shifts into PSF and photometric diagnostics through image simulations. Our analysis leads to the following main conclusions: 

• The analytic refraction model presented in Sec. 2 reproduces to high accuracy the chromatic shifts measured from a full 

Roman ray-tracing calculation. Despite some simplifying as-sumptions, the lateral chromatic shifts predicted by our model and those calculated from ray tracing agree to within 1/200 of a pixel or better in the scenario were the effect is the largest. The longitu-dinal shifts agree within 10% , which is an acceptable level given their subdominant effect on PSF and photometric residuals. 

• The lateral chromatic shift (decentering) is the dominant con-tribution to the broadband PSF error, while the longitudinal chromatic shift (defocus) is generally subdominant and below 

Roman requirements. The decentering term produces substan-tially larger PSF size and shape residuals than the defocus term, indicating that the dominant impact of filter-substrate refraction is through wavelength-dependent image translation rather than a shift in the best-focus position. The defocus contribution is there-fore not a limiting systematic for Roman weak lensing and does not require dedicated treatment in image simulations or PSF modeling. 

• The induced PSF and flux errors depend strongly on both fil-ter and field position, increasing toward the outer focal plane.  

> 14 https://github.com/DukeCosmology/ roman_imsim

This spatial trend follows directly from the geometric origin of the effect, since the angle of incidence at the filter grows with distance from the focal-plane center. The spatial pattern of the decentering-induced ellipticity residuals is highly coherent, show-ing an approximately radial alignment across the focal plane. 

• In the baseline weak lensing bands Y106, J129, and H158, the decentering contribution exceeds the Roman PSF size and shape requirements by nearly an order of magnitude, imply-ing that this effect must be modeled for precision weak lensing analyses. Across these bands, the RMS PSF size residual is typi-cally ∼ 0.3–0.4% , rising above 1% in the outer regions of the focal plane. The corresponding RMS ellipticity residuals are typically of order ∼ 40 × 10 −4 and can approach ∼ 100 × 10 −4 toward the field edges. These residuals are considerably larger than the 

Roman HLIS requirements of 0.072% for the fractional error on the PSF size and 5.7 × 10 −4 for each ellipticity component. By contrast, the impact on point-source photometry remains below the requirements for most bands, becoming relevant only in R062 and W146. 

• The dominant decentering effect can be accurately incorpo-rated into large-scale image simulations via a custom photon operator. We implement the predicted lateral chromatic shifts, validated against ray tracing as described in the first bullet point, as a GalSim photon operator that directly displaces photon po-sitions during shooting according to each photon’s wavelength. Comparison with the FFT-based approach shows that this im-plementation reproduces the PSF size and shape residuals with accuracy well within the Roman requirements in the weak lensing bands, making it suitable for incorporation into large-scale Roman 

image simulations. The results also highlight a broader lesson about chromatic effects in the W146 filter. The W146 band shows substantially larger chro-matic refraction-induced PSF errors than the weak lensing bands: PSF size residuals reaching the 2–3% level, point-source flux residu-als exceeding the 1% requirement, and defocus-like effects becoming relevant for size and shape characterization of the PSF. This rein-forces existing concerns, raised in the context of chromatic diffrac-tion rather than refraction, about using the W146 filter for precision shape measurement (Berlfein et al. 2025, 2026). Taken together, this work establishes that filter-substrate refraction is a non-negligible source of chromatic PSF error for Roman , and that its dominant manifestation, wavelength-dependent lateral decen-tering, must be accounted for in any realistic PSF model aimed at precision weak lensing science. The analytic formalism and photon-operator implementation presented here provide the tools needed to incorporate this effect into the next generation of Roman image simulations so as to test and validate any corrections for the ef-fect. Looking further ahead, the model predictions are also testable once the telescope is in-flight. Observations of stars with a range of spectral energy distributions across the focal plane could provide an empirical verification of the refraction model, testing its predicted wavelength and field dependence as one component of the broader end-to-end response characterization of the instrument. In addition, understanding how filter-substrate refraction affects empirical PSF modeling frameworks such as PIFF 15 , which is expected to be used for PSF modeling for Roman in-flight data, will also be an important next step.   

> 15 https://github.com/rmjarvis/Piff MNRAS 000 , 1–19 (2026)

# Filter Refraction 17 

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 

This paper has undergone internal review in the Roman High Latitude Imaging Survey Cosmology Project Infrastructure Team (PIT). We would like to thank Ami Choi and Kaili Cao for helpful comments and feedback during the review process. This work was supported in part by the OpenUniverse effort, which is funded by NASA under JPL Contract Task 70-711320, “Maximizing Science Exploitation of Simulated Cosmological Survey Data Across Surveys”; and in part by the “Maximizing Cosmological Science with the Roman 

High Latitude Imaging Survey” Roman Project Infrastructure Team (NASA grant 22-ROMAN11-0011). TZ is supported by Schmidt Sciences. 

DATA AVAILABILITY 

The GalSim package is publicly available at https://github. com/GalSim-developers/GalSim . This research made use of 

pysiaf , an open source Python package for Handling of Science Instrument Aperture Files (SIAF) for space telescopes (Sahlmann et al. 2019). The Diffsky extragalactic catalog and stellar cata-log are available through the NASA/IPAC Infrared Science Archive (IRSA) at https://irsa.ipac.caltech.edu/data/theory/ openuniverse2024/overview.html .

REFERENCES 

Akeson R., et al., 2019, arXiv e-prints, p. arXiv:1902.05569 Albrecht A., et al., 2006, arXiv e-prints, pp astro–ph/0609591 Anderson J., King I. R., 2000, PASP, 112, 1360 Astier P., et al., 2013, A&A, 557, A55 Baron M., Sassolas B., Pinard L., Ealet A., 2023, Optics Express, 31, 32968 Berlfein F., Mandelbaum R., Li X., Zhang T., Dodelson S., Markovic K., 2025, MNRAS, 542, 608 Berlfein F., Mandelbaum R., Xu J., Zhang T., 2026, arXiv e-prints, p. arXiv:2603.15763 Bernstein G. M., Jarvis M., 2002, AJ, 123, 583 Born M., Wolf E., 1980, Principles of Optics Electromagnetic Theory of Propagation, Interference and Diffraction of Light. Cambridge University Press Cao K., Hirata C. M., Laliotis K., Yamamoto M., Macbeth E., Troxel M. A., 2025, ApJS, 277, 55 Carlsten S. G., Strauss M. A., Lupton R. H., Meyers J. E., Miyazaki S., 2018, MNRAS, 479, 1491 Cromey B., Von Handorf R., Pedroncelli J., Delker T., Sabatke D., 2023, in Barto A. A., Keller F., Stahl H. P., eds, Society of Photo-Optical Instrumentation Engineers (SPIE) Conference Series Vol. 12676, UV/Optical/IR Space Telescopes and Instruments: Innovative Technolo-gies and Concepts XI. p. 126760R, doi:10.1117/12.2676488 Cypriano E. S., Amara A., Voigt L. M., Bridle S. L., Abdalla F. B., Réfrégier A., Seiffert M., Rhodes J., 2010, MNRAS, 405, 494 Eifler T., et al., 2021, MNRAS, 507, 1514 Eifler T., Hirata C., et al., 2023, Optimizing the Roman HLWAS, Ro-man Core Community Survey White Paper, https://asd.gsfc.nasa. gov/roman/white_papers/2023/070_Eifler_HLWAS.pdf 

Eifler T., et al., 2024, arXiv e-prints, p. arXiv:2411.04088 Eriksen M., Hoekstra H., 2018, MNRAS, 477, 3433 Euclid Collaboration et al., 2022, A&A, 662, A92 Hearin A., Korytov D., Kovacs E., Benson A., Aung H., Bradshaw C., Camp-bell D., LSST Dark Energy Science Collaboration 2020, MNRAS, 495, 5040 Hirata C., Seljak U., 2003, MNRAS, 343, 459 Hirata C. M., et al., 2024, MNRAS, 528, 2533 Hoekstra H., Jain B., 2008, Annual Review of Nuclear and Particle Science, 58, 99 Ivezić Ž., et al., 2019, ApJ, 873, 111 Jarvis M., et al., 2021, MNRAS, 501, 1282 Jiménez-Teja Y., Benítez N., Molino A., Fernandes C. A. C., 2015, MNRAS, 453, 1136 Kannawadi A., Shapiro C. A., Mandelbaum R., Hirata C. M., Kruk J. W., Rhodes J. D., 2016, PASP, 128, 095001 Kitching T., et al., 2010, arXiv e-prints, p. arXiv:1009.0779 Kruk J., et al., 2023, Science Requirements Document. https: //roman.gsfc.nasa.gov/science/docs/RST-SYS-REQ-0020D_ DOORs_Export.pdf 

LSST Science Collaboration et al., 2009, arXiv e-prints, p. arXiv:0912.0201 Lee J., et al., 2023, AJ, 165, 222 Liaudat T., Starck J.-L., Kilbinger M., 2023, Front. Astron. Space Sci., 10, 1158213 Mandelbaum R., 2018, ARA&A, 56, 393 Mandelbaum R., et al., 2005, MNRAS, 361, 1287 McKechnie T. S., 1992, Journal of the Optical Society of America A, 9, 1937 Meyers J. E., Burchat P. R., 2015, Astrophys. J., 807, 182 Noll R. J., 1976, Journal of the Optical Society of America (1917-1983), 66, 207 OpenUniverse et al., 2025, MNRAS, 544, 3799 Pasquale B. A., et al., 2018, in Johnson R. B., Mahajan V. N., Thibault S., eds, Society of Photo-Optical Instrumentation Engineers (SPIE) Conference Series Vol. 10745, Current Developments in Lens Design and Optical Engineering XIX. p. 107450K, doi:10.1117/12.2325859 Perrin M. D., Sivaramakrishnan A., Lajoie C.-P., Elliott E., Pueyo L., Ravin-dranath S., Albert L., 2014, in Oschmann Jr. J. M., Clampin M., Fazio G. G., MacEwen H. A., eds, Society of Photo-Optical Instrumentation Engineers (SPIE) Conference Series Vol. 9143, Space Telescopes and In-strumentation 2014: Optical, Infrared, and Millimeter Wave. p. 91433X, doi:10.1117/12.2056689 Piotrowski L. W., et al., 2013, A&A, 551, A119 Plazas A. A., Bernstein G., 2012, PASP, 124, 1113 Roman Observations Time Allocation Committee Core Community Survey Definition Committees 2025, arXiv e-prints, p. arXiv:2505.10574 Rowe B. T. P., et al., 2015, Astronomy and Computing, 10, 121 Sahlmann J., Osborne S., Cox C., charlesrp Law D., Perrin M., marthaboyer Hunkeler J., 2019, spacetelescope/pysiaf: Introduce check against online version, doi:10.5281/zenodo.3516964, https://doi.org/10.5281/ zenodo.3516964 

Schutt T., et al., 2025, The Open Journal of Astrophysics, 8, 26 Spergel D., et al., 2015, arXiv e-prints, p. arXiv:1503.03757 Switzer E. R., et al., 2025, Appl. Opt., 64, 10525 The Dark Energy Survey Collaboration 2005, arXiv e-prints, pp astro– ph/0510346 The LSST Dark Energy Science Collaboration et al., 2018, arXiv e-prints, p. arXiv:1809.01669 Troxel M. A., et al., 2021, MNRAS, 501, 2044 Troxel M. A., et al., 2023, MNRAS, 522, 2801 Wyant J. C., Creath K., 1992, in Shannon R. R., Wyant J. C., eds, 1 Vol. 11, Applied Optics and Optical Engineering, Volume XI. p. 2 von der Linden A., et al., 2023, A wide-area extension to the Roman HLIS for multiwavelength galaxy cluster science, Roman Core Community Survey White Paper, https://asd.gsfc.nasa.gov/roman/white_ papers/2023/084_Linden_HLWAS.pdf 

APPENDIX A: DEPENDENCE OF DEFOCUS ON PRE-EXISTING ABERRATIONS 

In Sec. 4.2.2 we noted that the spatial dependence of the PSF size residuals induced by the added defocus term is much less smooth than that produced by decentering. In particular, the amplitude of the defocus-induced size residual can vary abruptly from detector to detector. Fig. A1 shows this dependence of the PSF size residuals 

MNRAS 000 , 1–19 (2026) 18 F. Berlfein et al.   

> Figure A1. Similar to Fig. 8 but for defocus, with an additional panel on the right showing the pre-existing defocus aberration across the focal plane. More specifically, the right panel is showing the negative of the fourth zernike coefficient 𝑎 4. We clearly see incoherence and detector dependence of the PSF size residuals across the field of view. This is due to the effect of the added defocus on the PSF size being dependent on the pre-existing defocus aberrations, which can vary between detectors. This dependence can be seen by comparing the left and right panels. The same cannot be said about the ellipticity residuals, which do not seem to depend on pre-existing aberrations like the PSF size does. We also note that the PSF size residuals can be negative, which happens when the effective longitudinal shift due to refraction causes the out-of-focus point to move closer to the detector plane.

on the specific detector. This behavior is not driven primarily by the spatial dependence of the longitudinal chromatic shift itself. Rather, it arises because the impact of an additional defocus perturbation depends on the pre-existing aberrations of the underlying Roman PSF. In practice, we find that the spatial pattern of the size residuals induced by the added defocus closely tracks the spatial pattern of the pre-existing size aberrations in the native Roman PSF model, which can be seen directly by comparing the left and right panels of Fig. A1. The flux residuals, although not shown explicitly, track the size residuals and are considerably smaller than the 1% requirement. The origin of this behavior can be understood from a simple Fourier-optics argument. Let the pupil-plane complex field be 

𝑈 ( 𝝆 ) = 𝑃 ( 𝝆 ) 𝑒 𝑖 𝜙 (𝝆 ) , (A1) where 𝑃 is the pupil transmission, 𝜌 is the normalized pupil radius, and 𝜙 is the pupil phase. The focal-plane PSF is 𝐼 (𝜽 ) = |Ψ(𝜽 )| 2,where Ψ is the Fraunhofer transform of 𝑈 and 𝜽 = (𝜃 1, 𝜃 2) denotes the angular coordinate in the focal plane, measured relative to the PSF centroid so that ¯𝜽 = 0. With this choice of origin, we define the normalized trace of the second-moment matrix, 𝑅 2 = 𝑄 11 + 𝑄 22 ,written in angular coordinates, as 

𝑅 2 ≡

∫ |𝜽 |2 𝐼 (𝜽 ) d2𝜃 

∫ 𝐼 (𝜽 ) d2𝜃 . (A2) Parseval’s theorem gives 

𝑅 2 =

 𝜆 𝑓 

2𝜋 

2 ∫ |∇ 𝜌 𝑈 ( 𝝆 )| 2 𝑑 2 𝜌 

∫ |𝑈 ( 𝝆 )| 2 𝑑 2 𝜌 . (A3) Using 

∇𝑈 = ∇ 𝑃𝑒 𝑖 𝜙  = 𝑒 𝑖 𝜙 (∇ 𝑃 + 𝑖𝑃 ∇𝜙 ) , (A4) we obtain 

|∇ 𝑈 |2 = |∇ 𝑃 |2 + 𝑃 2 |∇ 𝜙 |2, (A5) since the cross term cancels in the dot product. Because |𝑈 |2 = 𝑃 2,Equation (A3) becomes 

𝑅 2 =

 𝜆 𝑓 

2𝜋 

2 " ∫ |∇ 𝑃 |2 𝑑 2 𝜌 

∫ 𝑃 2 𝑑 2 𝜌 +

∫ 𝑃 2 |∇ 𝜙 |2 𝑑 2 𝜌 

∫ 𝑃 2 𝑑 2 𝜌 

#

. (A6) For a hard-edged uniform pupil, the |∇ 𝑃 |2 term is a pupil-edge con-stant and does not change when defocus is added. The change in 𝑅 2

therefore depends only on the phase term. Writing the pupil phase as 

𝜙 (𝝆 ) = 2𝜋𝑊 (𝝆 ), (A7) the aberration-dependent part of 𝑅 2 is proportional to the pupil aver-age of |∇ 𝑊 |2. The change in 𝑅 2 produced by modifying the wavefront from 𝑊 to 𝑊 ′ is then 

Δ𝑅 2 = (𝜆 𝑓 )2  |∇ 𝑊 ′ |2 

> 𝑃

− |∇ 𝑊 |2

> 𝑃

 , (A8) where ⟨·⟩ 𝑃 denotes the pupil-weighted average. Now consider adding an incremental defocus term Δ𝑎 4 to an ex-isting wavefront, 

𝑊 ′ (𝝆 ) = 𝑊 (𝝆 ) + Δ𝑎 4 𝑍 4 (𝝆 ), (A9) where 𝑍 4 is the Noll defocus mode. Expanding Equation (A8) gives 

Δ𝑅 2 = (𝜆 𝑓 )2 2Δ𝑎 4 ⟨∇ 𝑊 · ∇ 𝑍 4⟩𝑃 + ( Δ𝑎 4)2 |∇ 𝑍 4 |2

> 𝑃

 . (A10) Thus, the change in PSF size squared is not determined only by the newly added defocus term Δ𝑎 4; it also depends linearly on the coupling between the existing wavefront 𝑊 and the added defocus through the cross term ⟨∇ 𝑊 · ∇ 𝑍 4⟩𝑃 . If the pre-existing wavefront already contains defocus, so that 

𝑊 (𝝆 ) = 𝑊 other (𝝆 ) + 𝑎 4 𝑍 4 (𝝆 ), (A11) and the remaining aberrations are approximately uncorrelated with 

𝑍 4, then 

⟨∇ 𝑊 · ∇ 𝑍 4⟩𝑃 ≃ 𝑎 4 |∇ 𝑍 4 |2 

> 𝑃

. (A12) Equation (A10) then reduces to 

Δ𝑅 2 ≃ ( 𝜆 𝑓 )2 

2𝑎 4Δ𝑎 4 + ( Δ𝑎 4)2 

|∇ 𝑍 4 |2 

> 𝑃

. (A13) Equation (A13) shows explicitly why the size residual induced by an added defocus term depends on the pre-existing aberration state of the PSF. In the regime relevant here, the cross term 2𝑎 4Δ𝑎 4

generally dominates over the quadratic term (Δ𝑎 4)2, so the induced size change is expected to scale approximately with the native defocus already present in the Roman PSF model. This explains the behavior  

> MNRAS 000 , 1–19 (2026)

# Filter Refraction 19 

seen in Fig. A1, where the resulting PSF size residual is modulated by the detector-dependent pattern of the pre-existing aberrations, producing a more irregular spatial structure. Conversely, the shape residuals in Fig. A1 do not show the same strong dependence on the pre-existing aberration pattern. Instead, they follow the expected field-angle dependence more closely, with the residuals generally increasing toward larger distances from the center of the focal plane.