Title: Data Diversity, Not Frequency Invariance: A Controlled and Self-Audited Study of Compression-Robust Deepfake Detection

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2608.28685v1

Published Time: Tue, 01 Sep 2026 00:03:47 GMT

Number of Pages: 38

Markdown Content:
# Data Diversity, Not Frequency Invariance: A Controlled and Self-Audited Study of Compression-Robust Deepfake Detection 

Abbas Aliyev 1,∗

Samir Rustamov 1,2

> 1

ADA University, Baku, Azerbaijan 2MegaSec AI Company, Baku, Azerbaijan 

> ∗

Corresponding author: ashaliyev@ada.edu.az (S. Rustamov: srustamov@ada.edu.az )

This work has been submitted to the IEEE for possible publication. Copyright may be transferred without notice, after which this version may no longer be accessible. 

Abstract 

Frequency features and compression-invariant representation learning are widely assumed to be key to deepfake detection that survives video compression. We test this with CAFRL — block-DCT and FFT-phase streams, compression-level-conditioned band attention, and adversarial (gradient-reversal) compression invariance — and report a controlled negative. Under a pre-registered protocol with capacity- and augmentation-matched controls, a plain EfficientNet-B0 on multi-quality data beat CAFRL as specified at every compression level on the FaceForensics++ test split, by 3.66 AUC points at CRF 40 (paired, single seed). A self-audit of our own negative found four defects biased against the frequency hypothesis, and pre-specified re-tests repairing all four showed the deficit to be a recipe artifact, not an architecture failure: the baseline recipe recovered 3.96 points over the matching shipped-recipe variant. The frequency path made no detectable difference: discriminative alone (standalone validation AUC 0.91–0.98 late in training) but of no marginal value under this fusion, at two feature widths of one 4.0 M trunk, every seed-pooled interval for the intra-dataset compression contrasts including zero (3-seed pooled ∆ = −0.10 / +0 .22 AUC points at CRF 40, and equivalent within a post-hoc ±1-point margin given these three seeds per arm, unadjusted); on the single held-out manipulation tested, the fair variants sat below the plain backbone. The adversarial branch, as specified, added nothing and degraded its own conditioning estimator; at the fair recipe it is untested. Robustness under single-pass H.264 re-encoding came instead from data diversity: real constant-rate-factor variants beat synthetic JPEG augmentation by 7.3 points (single runs, non-overlapping intervals). The evidence is FaceForensics++-family, GAN-era and single-codec. Match controls on training recipe as well as capacity, and buy compression robustness with codec diversity before architecture. 

Keywords: benchmark testing · deepfakes · discrete cosine transforms · frequency-domain analysis 

· machine learning · reproducibility · robustness · video compression 

# 1 Introduction 

Detecting manipulated face video in the wild means detecting it after social platforms have re-encoded it. H.264 compression at high constant-rate-factor (CRF) settings destroys exactly the high-frequency residue that many detectors rely on, and published detectors routinely lose 5–15 AUC points between lightly compressed (c23) and heavily compressed (c40) versions of the same content — a collapse documented by the standard benchmark protocols [1, 2] and reproduced here for three 1arXiv:2608.28685v1 [cs.CV] 26 Aug 2026 published detectors (Appendix C). A large body of work responds with a common prescription: extract frequency-domain features (DCT spectra, FFT phase, band statistics), and make the representation 

invariant to compression, typically with adversarial objectives borrowed from domain adaptation [3–6]. The intuition is compelling — generative pipelines leave spectral fingerprints [7, 8], and invariance should preserve what survives re-encoding. This paper reports what happened when we built a strong instance of that prescription and evaluated it under unusually strict controls. CAFRL (Compression-Aware Frequency Representation Learning) combines a block-DCT stream and an FFT-phase stream with an ImageNet-pretrained spatial backbone; a learned compression-level estimator conditions an adaptive frequency-band attention gate (FiLM-style [9]); and a gradient-reversal discriminator enforces compression invariance on the frequency representation. The design was assembled from a 69-paper implementation-gap review of the compression-robust detection literature, and every ingredient in it is individually prescribed there: DCT-band mining [10], phase rather than amplitude under compression [11], FiLM-style conditioning [9], cross-modal attention fusion [12, 13], and gradient-reversal compression invariance [3–6]. Their combination, and the training recipe that carries it — loss weights, curriculum, per-group learning rates — is a plausible assembly we constructed from common ingredients, not a configuration any prior work prescribes. CAFRL lost — and what it lost to is the contribution: its own training recipe and its training data, not frequency. Three properties distinguish this negative from an anecdote: 1. The comparison was pre-registered and controlled. Before any ablation ran, we froze a paired-bootstrap win-rule and a STOP-gate — the two rules this paper calls pre-registered ;the later audit re-tests are pre-specified , a distinction Section 4 keeps throughout: the full model had to beat capacity-matched, augmentation-matched baselines before a 38-run ablation campaign would be spent. The gate fired in the negative direction: a plain EfficientNet-B0 (4.0 M parameters, CAFRL’s own backbone family, no frequency machinery) trained on the same multi-CRF data beat full CAFRL at every compression level (video-AUC .9590 vs .9224 at c40, both at seed 42, a paired ∆ of +0 .0366). Two confounds — augmentation policy and backbone capacity — were caught and explicitly ruled out with matched controls. 2. We audited our own negative before believing it. A structured post-hoc audit (Section 6) found the measurement clean but the causal story overclaimed, identifying eight defects (D1–D8), four of which were biased against the frequency hypothesis: an uncalibrated consistency loss that dominated the classification gradient 40–120 × in every arm (we call each trained model configuration an arm ); a 20 × backbone learning-rate mismatch inherited from the progressive curriculum; a bottlenecked spatial trunk; and a structural gradient deadlock in the probe used to conclude that the model “chooses” to discard frequency. 3. The hypothesis was then re-tested at its best. Four pre-specified re-tests repaired every defect, and the result narrowed but did not reverse the negative. The STOP-gate’s +3 .66 pt deficit at c40 proved to be a recipe artifact : CAFRL’s own components at the baseline’s training recipe recovered +3 .96 pt (Fair-N vs. CAFRL −adv, seed 42; significant). At that recipe the frequency path shows no detectable difference from the plain backbone at two spatial-feature widths, 3v3 (pooled ∆ at c40 −0.10 and +0 .22 pt, both 95% CIs including zero, both equivalent within a post-hoc ±1 pt margin given these three seeds per arm , against a resolution floor of ≈0.9 pt at the video level). The sub-network is demonstrably discriminative alone — a standalone head plateaus at validation AUC 0.91–0.98 — yet adds no marginal value under this fusion: redundant here, not shown to be absent from the trunk (Section 7). 2The constructive finding survives all of it: robustness to single-pass H.264 CRF re-encoding is bought by data diversity. Every fairly trained model on multi-CRF data — with or without frequency streams — shows the same flat degradation curve across the compression range it was trained on, and training on real H.264 CRF variants beats the common synthetic JPEG-augmentation shortcut by +7.3 AUC points at real c40 (significant) — the one comparison here in which the test distribution differs in kind from the training distribution. 

Contributions. 

• C1 — a controlled, audited negative , in two parts, because no one experiment establishes both. (a) At matched capacity, augmentation and optimization recipe, and at two spatial-feature widths, block-DCT and FFT-phase streams under CMAM or γ-residual fusion add no detectable value over a plain spatial backbone on multi-CRF data, with the mechanism demonstrated. 

(b) At CAFRL’s shipped recipe, adding adversarial compression-invariance to those streams also does not help and degrades the estimator it conditions — and (b) was not re-tested at the matched recipe, where it stays untested rather than refuted. Both hold at one operating point: a 4–21 M CNN on FaceForensics++, ≈0.96 intra-dataset and ≈0.70 cross-dataset (Sections 5–7). 

• C2 — the constructive claim: data diversity is the dominant lever for robustness under single-pass H.264 CRF re-encoding; real-CRF training ≫ synthetic JPEG augmentation (+7 .3 pt, single runs). The transferable half is that comparison, measured under a genuine shift in kind; the flat-degradation half is measured in corpus , on FaceForensics++ test data, and Section 7.4 shows it does not carry to the near-domain corpus at the same CRF levels (Section 8). 

• C3 — the protocol that makes the negative trustworthy: pre-registered STOP-gates and paired-∆ win-rules, capacity- and augmentation-matched controls, and a self-audit of the negative . Every FF++ contrast is released with the per-video scores that let it be re-adjudicated; the out-of-distribution cells are released as summary statistics only (Sections 4, 6, 9). 

• C4 — harmonized benchmarks: video-level compression sweeps for Xception, F3-Net (our FAD-branch reimplementation, see Appendix C), FreqNet (to our knowledge its first video-level c40 report, and the one arm trained from scratch rather than ImageNet-initialized) and EfficientNet-B0 on one harness, tabulated at the compressed levels in Table 8 with the full seven-level matrix and the per-video predictions released (Section 5, Appendix C). 

What this study covers. FaceForensics++-family evidence: FF++ training and intra-dataset testing, one held-out manipulation (FaceShifter), a near-domain check on DFD — which shares FF++’s capture and processing lineage rather than being an independent corpus — and a cross-dataset check on Celeb-DF v2, with DFDC [14] and WildDeepfake [15] not run. Every manipulation is GAN- or graphics-era (2019–2020) and compression is single-pass H.264 CRF re-encoding. Section 9’s Limitations state which conclusion each of these bounds and mark the untested cells. 

# 2 Related work 

Frequency-domain deepfake detection. F3-Net [10] mines frequency-aware clues with DCT-based decomposition; SPSL [11] shows phase spectra survive up-sampling artifacts better than amplitude; FreqNet [16] learns source-agnostic high-frequency representations. Spectral fingerprints of generative up-sampling are documented by [7, 8]. A parallel lineage uses noise residuals rather than transform coefficients: Luo et al. [13] extract SRM high-frequency features from intermediate feature 3maps and fuse them with an RGB Xception trunk through dual cross-modality attention, reporting cross-manipulation gains on top of a strong spatial trunk — the closest published counter-evidence to the redundancy reading we report below, and a frequency family our instantiation does not test. Its gains are large (up to +0 .29 AUC cross-manipulation, +0 .20 on Celeb-DF v2) and are measured at one fixed quality, FF++ c23, which is exactly the regime Table 5 identifies as the one this paper does not test in. These works motivate frequency features under compression but largely evaluate at light compression; our study asks specifically whether one such frequency path pays for itself when the training data already spans the compression range. 

Compression-robust detection. Cao et al. [4] combine metric and adversarial learning for compression-insensitive forgery features; Sensitivity Decouple Learning [5] separates compression-insensitive from compression-sensitive components — an image restoration method rather than a detector, whose decoupling mechanism this line of work borrows; PLADA [6] pairs a gradient-reversal compression-invariance objective with a compression-detection head in the JPEG image domain — the closest prior to CAFRL’s adversarial component. DANet-ATP [17] applies adversarial compression-invariance to audio deepfakes. CAFRL differs in operating on H.264 video with hybrid DCT+phase streams and ordinal compression-level conditioning rather than invariance alone; we do not claim priority for adversarial compression-invariance itself. The intuitions under test are current rather than historical: the works instantiating them here are published in 2024–2025 venues [5, 6, 16, 17]. 

Foundation-model trunks. The detection frontier has moved substantially toward frozen foun-dation models with light adaptation: a linear probe on frozen CLIP features [18] and forgery-aware adapters over the same trunk [19] generalize across unseen generators far better than trained CNNs. Those trunks are stronger, and orders of magnitude larger, than the 4.0 M CNN this study matches capacity against, so our verdict reaches them only as a conjecture (Section 9). The small-CNN regime nonetheless remains the one that matters for on-device and high-throughput screening, where a 4 M detector is deployable and a per-frame frozen ViT is not — and it is the regime in which the frequency-plus-invariance prescription was formulated and is still being published. 

Invariance learning. The gradient-reversal layer originates in domain-adversarial training [3]; HSIC-based independence penalties [20] are the standard non-adversarial alternative. Our pre-registered ablation program included a GRL-vs-HSIC bake-off; it was correctly never run because the STOP-gate fired first (Section 5). 

Evaluation rigor. DeepfakeBench [2] documents how implementation and augmentation details dominate reported differences between detectors; our augmentation-confound episode (Section 5.2) is a direct instance. We follow FaceForensics++ [1] protocols and its official splits, and evaluate on cross-dataset Celeb-DF v2 [21] and near-domain DFD. Our contribution to this line is procedural: pre-registration of decision rules [22, 23], and a structured audit of a negative result before publishing it [24]. 

# 3 CAFRL as specified 

This section describes the hypothesis under test, neutrally and as specified; Sections 5–7 adjudicate it. 

Architecture. Fig. 1 shows the architecture. Input is a 256 ×256 face crop. Three parallel representations are computed: (i) a spatial stream — EfficientNet-B0 [25] features (ImageNet-pretrained); (ii) a block-DCT stream — 8 ×8 block DCT of the luma channel, band-grouped and 4face crop                          

> 256 ×256
> Spatial stream
> EfficientNet-B0 (ImageNet)
> Block-DCT stream
> 8×8 DCT ·band grouping ·CNN
> FFT-phase stream
> windowed FFT (sin φ, cos φ)·CNN
> Compression estimator
> ordinal CRF bin ·1.37 M band gate zero-init FiLM
> zfreq
> CMAM fusion
> cross-modal attention + zero-init fusion gate
> classifier ˆyreal/fake
> Lcls
> GRL
> −λ∇
> Compression discr.
> spectral-norm ·1.32 M ˆcCRF level
> Ladv
> ImageNet norm BT.601 luma BT.601 luma raw RGB band energies
> Fspat
> ˜Fdct
> Fphase
> reversed gradient ⇒
> compression-invariant zfreq
> qemb
> Lcrf (soft ordinal)
> FiLM conditioning aux losses: Lcons (clean-anchored),
> Lphase (geodesic), Ldiv (diversity)

Figure 1: CAFRL as specified. Solid arrows: forward data flow; dashed arrows: FiLM conditioning from the compression estimator’s embedding qemb . The discriminator sees only the frequency representation zfreq (the spatial stream is excluded), so the adversarial gradient routes to the frequency path alone. encoded by a small CNN; (iii) an FFT-phase stream — windowed FFT phase as (sin φ, cos φ)channels, following the phase-over-amplitude evidence under compression [11]. A compression estimator (1.37 M parameters) predicts the ordinal CRF bin from the crop; its embedding conditions a frequency-band attention gate via zero-initialized FiLM [9], so band re-weighting can adapt to the (estimated) compression level. Streams are fused by cross-modal attention (CMAM [12]) with a zero-initialized fusion gate, then classified. A spectral-normalized compression discriminator 

(1.32 M) receives the frequency representation through a gradient-reversal layer [3] and enforces compression invariance; per-sample split BatchNorm separates clean and compressed statistics. Full model: 11.97 M parameters (10.65 M without the adversarial branch). 

Shipped training recipe. As specified, CAFRL trains 50 epochs with a three-phase progressive curriculum (clean → medium → heavy compression), a frozen backbone for the first 10 epochs, per-group learning rates (backbone 10 −5, frequency streams 10 −4), a sigmoid GRL λ-ramp to 0.5, and auxiliary losses: an L1 clean-anchored consistency loss ( w=0 .5), a phase-geodesic loss (0.3), a circular-relation loss (0.2), an attention-diversity loss (1.0), and a soft-ordinal CRF loss (0.2) for the estimator. EMA weights are used for evaluation. The individual devices — progressive curricula, consistency and geometry losses, per-group learning rates — are common in the compression-robust literature, but the particular weights, schedule and freeze points are ours, and Section 6 shows this recipe, not the architecture, caused the deficit. 

# 4 Experimental protocol 

Data. Throughout, c X denotes H.264 encoding at constant rate factor (CRF) X — larger X

means heavier compression — and c0 is the uncompressed original. FaceForensics++ [1], all four core manipulation methods (Deepfakes, Face2Face, FaceSwap, NeuralTextures), official train/val/test identity splits. FaceShifter [26] is held out entirely as the unseen-manipulation probe. From the c0 masters we produce real H.264 re-encodes at CRF {28, 32, 36 } in addition to the distributed c23/c40, giving six training levels {c0, c23, c28, c32, c36, c40 } plus an eval-only c18; face crops are 5deterministic re-crops of curated multi-person face tracks (32 frames per video, uniformly spaced). Multi-quality (“mq”) training mixes all six levels per epoch batch. Out-of-distribution evaluation uses cross-dataset Celeb-DF v2 [21] and near-domain DFD (c23/c40). 

Metrics. Video-level AUC (per-frame scores mean-pooled per (video, method); 700 test videos = 140 real + 560 fake per level); AUC comp = mean video-AUC over the heavy levels {c28, c32, c36, c40 };clean-anchored drop = AUC c23 − AUC comp . Uncertainty: 10,000-replicate video-level bootstrap CIs per cell (one arm evaluated at one level on one test set); paired deltas draw one shared video-index vector per replicate so both arms are scored on identical resamples. Multi-seed arms report the 3-seed mean ± the 95% t-band (4 .30 s/ √3) and pooled contrasts (per-video mean across seeds, then the paired bootstrap). 

Statistical reporting. Every interval in this paper is a percentile bootstrap interval over 10,000 replicates drawn from a fixed seed, so it reproduces to the digit rather than only in distribution; a replicate that resamples a single class is redrawn, and in a paired ∆ the redraw is shared, so the two arms are always scored on identical resamples. P (∆ >0) is the fraction of those replicates in which the difference is positive — a description of the same distribution, not a p-value. We call a contrast significant when its 95% paired interval excludes zero, and we never adjudicate a difference between arms by the overlap of their marginal intervals, which for correlated arms manufactures false nulls — with one exception, flagged where it occurs: the training-data comparison of Section 8, whose synthetic-augmentation arm did not retain per-video scores, so no paired bootstrap is computable for it. Pooled (3v3) intervals average each video’s score across an arm’s three seeds and then resample videos, so they are conditional on the three seeds that were run . One consequence deserves a clause: averaging scores over seeds evaluates a three-member score-level ensemble rather than any single trained model, and an ensemble’s AUC is better behaved than its members’ — which is why Fair-W’s pooled lean (+0 .22 pt) is less than half its seed-mean lean (+0 .54 pt). A reader deploying one trained model should read the pooled rows accordingly. The resampling unit is the evaluated video, which is not self-evidently the exchangeable one: FaceForensics++ names a manipulated file {target } { source },and each of the 140 target identities in the test split contributes one real video and four manipulations of it. We therefore report five resampling units : the evaluated video (the published one), and four cluster definitions — the target identity, the source identity, the manipulated base video with its four methods, and the unordered identity pair . Appendix E re-runs every adjudicated contrast at all five, and again with the seeds resampled as well. No verdict in this paper depends on either choice. 

What this design can detect. At α=0 .05 and 80% power, the realized precision of the pooled video-level contrasts corresponds to a minimum detectable effect of about 0.9 AUC points — 0.83 at the video unit and 0.91 at the identity-cluster unit, so ≈0.9 covers both rather than naming either. Treating the seed as the experimental unit instead ( k=3 per arm; the pooled two-arm across-seed SD is 0.49 pt, the per-arm SDs running 0.23–0.645 pt) it is 1.5 points , and 1.7 points under the two-level estimator of Appendix E that propagates both variance components; we quote 1.5–1.7 pt where the distinction matters and the conservative 1.7 where one number must serve. Effects smaller than these would have been detected here with probability below 80 %, in either direction — which is not the same as “could not have been observed”. Every neutral verdict below is bounded by that resolution, and Appendix E reports the margin within which the neutral contrasts can — and cannot — be called equivalent. 

Confirmatory and descriptive contrasts. Thirteen comparisons in this paper are confirmatory: the eight adjudicated contrasts of Table 3, the four held-out-manipulation contrasts of Appendix D, 6and the training-data comparison that carries claim C2. Each was adjudicated under a rule fixed before the run or the evaluation it governs, and Table 3 names that rule’s grade row by row. Everything else — the compression sweeps, the cross-dataset cells, the mechanism read-outs, the baseline reproductions — is descriptive, and is labelled so where it is reported. Over that family of thirteen the Bonferroni threshold is α/ 13 = 3 .8 × 10 −3, and the four significant results the paper’s claims rest on survive it and Holm’s step-down procedure: the STOP-gate contrast ( p = 2 .0 × 10 −4), the fair-recipe recovery (1 .4 × 10 −5), the recipe share (5 .5 × 10 −6) and the real-CRF-versus-JPEG training gap (3 .3 × 10 −6); Appendix E gives the family and both procedures. Non-significant leans are treated identically in both directions: the same rule that retires the full-trunk variant’s +0 .22 pt pooled lean retires the shipped recipe’s +2 .2 pt held-out-manipulation lean. The two equivalence tests of Appendix E are 

not members of this family: they were added after the results existed and are reported as post-hoc descriptive characterizations of two contrasts the family already contains. Appendix E prints what they read under adjustment anyway, including the one that would not survive it. 

Pre-registration. Two grades of rule govern this paper and we keep them apart. Pre-registered 

— frozen before any result existed, git-tagged, and released verbatim — are (i) the STOP-gate :full CAFRL had to beat the strongest baseline on the paired-∆ at c40 — the frozen text says 

best baseline , and the capacity- and augmentation-matched qualifier is ours, added when the same document’s confound provision produced the matched control that adjudicated it — else the ablation campaign — six arm families (GRL-vs-HSIC bake-off, conditioning, fusion, curriculum), 38 runs ,

∼270 h of training as the frozen plan budgeted them — would not run; and (ii) the win-rule for those ablations — symmetric, able to declare the full model the loser, with a registered NULL outcome. The gate’s binding sentence reads: “ A0 passes iff the 95% CI of ∆ = AUC(A0) −

AUC(best baseline) excludes 0 on the positive side (paired p < 0.05)”, the contrast being the paired video-resampling bootstrap paired auc delta at c40 video-AUC with B=10 ,000 shared index vectors; “A0” is CAFRL as specified; the full frozen text is released verbatim in the repository’s 

preregistration/ directory, under the annotated tag phase5-prereg-a1 at commit 65a8ebb . One honest limit on that evidence: it is an internal repository history, not a third-party registry receipt, and git author and committer dates are settable by the committer. What the release offers is the frozen text itself, the tag, and the commit sequence that places each rule before the runs it governed — inspectable, but self-attested. The rule binds a comparison type — the strongest baseline, adjudicated by a paired-∆ interval — not a named checkpoint, which is why the capacity-matched control constructed later under the gate’s own confound provision is the arm that adjudicated it. Pre-specified 

— each rule journaled before its own run executed, but written after the audit, when the STOP-gate result, the ablation numbers and the audit’s diagnosis were already known — are the rules of the four fair re-tests (Section 7) and of the held-out-manipulation re-check (Section 7.4). Pre-specification fixes the analysis before its data exist; it does not make the hypothesis a priori, and we do not claim that it does. Every verdict is reported at its own rule’s grade, and both grades of frozen text are released verbatim, so the goalposts could not move after the numbers arrived, in either direction [27] — the pre-registration discipline of the empirical sciences [22, 23, 28] transplanted into an architecture study. 

Baselines. Xception [1, 29], F3-Net [10], FreqNet [16], each run in both protocols — the literature protocol (c23-trained) and the mq-control protocol (multi-CRF-trained, matched to CAFRL’s data), six runs in all, every one of them reported at the compressed levels in Table 8, with the complete seven-level sweep released; plus the capacity-matched control — plain EfficientNet-B0 (4.0 M 

≈ CAFRL’s own backbone), multi-CRF data, flip-only augmentation, denoted SpatialBase . The currency of “capacity” throughout this paper is trained parameters , counted as Table 1’s caption 7c0 c18 c23 c28 c32 c36 c40         

> H.264 compression (CRF)
> 0.90 0.92 0.94 0.96 0.98 1.00
> Video-level AUC (FF++ test)
> Δ = 3.66 pt (paired, s42)
> (a) Shipped recipe — the falsification (seed 42)
> SpatialBase (EffNet-B0) CAFRL as specified CAFRL−adv (no adversary) spatial-residual (γ→0) c0 c18 c23 c28 c32 c36 c40
> H.264 compression (CRF)
> (b) Fair recipe — the re-test (3-seed means)
> SpatialBase (EffNet-B0) Fair-N (narrow trunk) Fair-W (full trunk) TrunkCtrl

Figure 2: Video-AUC across compression levels (FF++ test, 700 videos per level). (a) The shipped-recipe falsification at seed 42 — the arms as the STOP-gate adjudicated them, matching Tables 2 and 4 cell for cell; the annotated c40 gap is the adjudicated paired contrast +0 .0366 (the two further shipped-CAFRL seeds lie within 0.002 of the plotted curve at c40). (b) The fair-recipe re-tests, plotted as 3-seed means with 95% t-bands (4 .30 s/ √3, k=3), so its SpatialBase point at c40 is the 3-seed mean 0.9565 rather than Table 4’s seed-42 value 0.9590. Appendix A prints the per-seed values at c40 and AUC comp ; panel (b)’s remaining levels are 3-seed means that appear in no printed cell and are in the release, the one place this paper departs from its rule that every plotted point is a printed one. specifies; we use it rather than FLOPs because it is the quantity the released configurations make countable, and we note that it is the same figure the works audited in Table 5 do not report. “Capacity-matched” means matched to CAFRL’s backbone family : the control carries 4.0 M against CAFRL’s 11.97 M, so it is in fact capacity-disadvantaged , which is the conservative direction for a negative and is why we use it. Baseline recipe: uniform lr 2 ×10 −4, 30 epochs, batch 32, best-by-validation selection. Compute: 2 × A100 40 GB; a CAFRL run is ≈7.5 h, a baseline ≈4 h. Throughout we call CAFRL’s own training procedure (Section 3) the shipped recipe and this baseline procedure the fair recipe — “fair” because the re-tests of Section 7 apply it symmetrically to both sides of every comparison. Table 1 names every arm the paper compares, with the run identifier under which its configuration, checkpoint and per-video predictions are released. 

# 5 Results I — the falsification 

5.1 The STOP-gate fires 

At matched capacity, matched data and matched augmentation for the two arms the gate adjudicated (Table 2, rows 1–2; the Xception-mq row is shown for context and uses the standard augmentation policy, see Section 5.2), and Fig. 2a: CAFRL’s curve is flat and robust by literature standards (clean-anchored drop 0.026) — but the plain backbone’s is flatter, and higher at every compressed level. (At c0 the adversary-free variant CAFRL −adv is 0.04 pt above it, a difference far inside this design’s ≈0.9 pt resolution; Table 4.) The paired STOP-gate contrast ∆(SpatialBase − CAFRL as specified) at c40 is + 0.0366 , 95% CI [+0.020, +0.054] — both arms at seed 42, 10,000-replicate paired video bootstrap — significant, and 8confirmatory under the pre-registered rule quoted in Section 4, with roughly one-third the parameters (4.0 M vs. 11.97 M) and none of the frequency machinery. Per the pre-registered rule, the ablation campaign did not run. 

5.2 Confound discipline 

Two alternative explanations were caught during the campaign and controlled before concluding: 

• Augmentation. A stronger augmentation policy (added to reproduce literature baseline anchors) accidentally advantaged the mq-control baselines over flip-only CAFRL. Re-running the controls flip-only changed little on mq data (Xception-mq 0 .968 → 0.963 at c40): augmentation was not the explanation. (It mattered greatly for c23-trained literature baselines — +3 to +6 frame-AUC points at c40 — consistent with [2]; details in Appendix C.) 

• Capacity. Xception’s win could reflect its 20.8 M parameters. The capacity-matched Spatial-Base control (4.0 M) still beat CAFRL — capacity was not the explanation either. 

5.3 The causal chain, as originally read 

With the recipe held fixed at CAFRL’s own, ablations traced the deficit (all at c40): removing the GRL does not recover (CAFRL −adv 0.919 vs full 0.922 — the adversary is not the culprit here); a do-no-harm spatial-residual redesign (logit = spatial + γ·frequency, γ zero-initialized) also does not recover (0.914) and drives γ → 0. At the time we read this as “the model freely discards frequency; frequency is unwanted; the spatial path is architecturally bottlenecked.” Section 6 shows this reading was wrong — the measurement stands, the mechanism does not. This is also the evidence the title’s second half rests on and the place to scope it: “not frequency invariance” names the arm adjudicated here — adversarial compression invariance as CAFRL specified it , at the shipped recipe, where it added nothing and degraded the conditioning estimator it was meant to serve (Section 6, D6). The fair re-tests of Section 7 all run with the adversary off; they were designed to give the frequency representation its best chance, not to re-tune the adversary, so at the fair recipe invariance is untested rather than refuted, and we say so wherever the claim is made. 

# 6 The self-audit 

Before writing the negative up, we audited it as an adversary would — four author-directed, tool-assisted review passes, each confined to a different failure surface and to the artifacts rather than the campaign’s conclusions: training parity, the frequency-path implementation, evaluation symmetry, and the run diagnostics, with the decisive cells re-executed. The passes were independent of one another and of the conclusion under audit — separate scopes, separate evidence, no shared findings — and not independent of the authors; their scopes, checks and outcomes are released verbatim in the artifact repository’s audit/ directory. The measurement survived (every headline number reproduced bit-exactly; evaluation fully symmetric; no leakage; selection on validation only). The 

causal interpretation did not. Eight defects, D1–D8, of which four biased the comparison against 

frequency: D1 , an L1 consistency loss running 40–120 × the classification loss at the curriculum’s compressed-phase onset, in every arm including CAFRL −adv; D2 , the residual probe’s γ → 0, a shock collapse locked in by a structural gradient deadlock rather than a choice; D3 , an optimization that was never matched — a 20 × backbone learning-rate gap, a 10-epoch freeze, heavy data deferred to the learning-rate tail; and D4 , a spatial path tapping an intermediate 320-channel map and discarding the backbone’s final 1280-d representation. Each is repaired by a named re-test below (D1 9Pre-registration (before any result) 

> STOP-gate + paired-∆ win-rule frozen under a git tag; each re-test’s rule journaled before its run.

Controlled cam-paign 

> full CAFRL (11.97 M) vs the capacity-matched “SpatialBase” (4.0 M) + Xception / F3-Net / FreqNet, identical multi-CRF data.
> Confounds ruled out:
> augmentation; capacity.

STOP-gate fires — the thesis is falsified 

> SpatialBase beats full CAFRL at every level (c40: .9590 vs .9224; ∆ +0.0366, CI [+0.020, +0.054]).

Planned ablation campaign  

> six arm families, 38 runs — GRL-vs-HSIC bake-off, conditioning, fusion, curriculum —
> never run per the frozen rule.
> ≈270 h of training saved

Adversarial self-audit of the nega-tive          

> measurement reproduces bit-exactly; causal read-ing unsound. Four de-fects biased against fre-quency: D1 auxiliary-loss dominance ·D2 γ
> deadlock ·D3 optimiza-tion mismatch ·D4 bot-tlenecked trunk.

Pre-specified fair re-tests (repair D1– D4)  

> TrunkCtrl: trunk gap recipe-dominant ( ≈88%) Fair-N (no invariance losses): 0.9586 ≈
> SpatialBase 0.9590 Fair-W (full trunk +γ-residual): +0.0056, CI incl. 0
> ≈35 h

Seed confirmation (3 seeds vs 3 seeds)  

> pooled ∆ at c40: Fair-N −0.0010 / Fair-W +0.0022, both CIs include 0 — no detectable difference.
> ≈31 h

Verdict     

> deficit = recipe artifact (+3 .96 pt at c40, s42); frequency informative alone (AUC 0.91–0.98) yet redundant under this fusion; robustness under single-pass H.264 CRF re-encoding, in corpus is bought by data diver-sity (real CRF ≫JPEG, +7 .3 pt).

Figure 3: Campaign flow: frozen decision rules → STOP-gate falsification → adversarial self-audit →

fair re-tests → seed confirmation. Every decision rule was frozen before the run it governed; the fired gate halted the planned ablation campaign (incl. a GRL-vs-HSIC [20] bake-off) on a falsified thesis. and D3 by Fair-N and TrunkCtrl, D2 and D4 by Fair-W). Appendix B is the authoritative telling: the complete D1–D8 ledger, why each defect mattered, and what closed it. The lesser defects: split-BatchNorm evaluation routing (D5 — probed, immaterial, direction ≤ 0); the GRL silently degrading its own conditioning estimator (D6 — ±1-bin accuracy 0 .88 → ≈ 0.4under the adversary; healthy ≈1.0 without it); a discriminator-at-chance readout that was actually a constant-predictor collapse (D7 — diagnostic corrected); and reproducibility gaps (D8 — per-video predictions and provenance now saved for every cell). Training-health guardrails now ship in the codebase — a warning when any auxiliary loss exceeds 10 × the classification loss, and when the estimator’s ±1-bin accuracy falls below 0.7 — so D1/D6-class failures self-report in future runs. 

# 7 Results II — the fair re-tests 

Four re-tests, each with its decision rule journaled before the run: TrunkCtrl , the trunk-recipe control; Fair-N , the fair frequency test at CAFRL’s narrow trunk; and Fair-W , the same test at the full trunk (Table 1; Fig. 2b). 

7.1 The deficit was a recipe artifact 

TrunkCtrl (architecture vs recipe, 3 seeds): CAFRL’s exact 320 →256 spatial trunk alone, trained with the plain baseline recipe, reaches c40 seed-mean 0 .9536 (3 seeds) against SpatialBase’s 0.9590 (seed 42). That splits the gap between SpatialBase and the shipped-recipe spatial-residual arm at c40 — 0 .9590 − 0.9139 = 0 .0451, both single runs at seed 42 — into a recipe share and an 10 architecture share: 0.0451 | {z }   

> SpatialBase −sp.-res.

= 0.0397 | {z }  

> recipe ,88%

+ 0.0054 | {z }  

> trunk ,12%

,

where “sp.-res.” is the shipped-recipe spatial-residual arm, the recipe share is TrunkCtrl’s 3-seed mean minus that arm (0 .9536 − 0.9139) and the architecture share is SpatialBase minus the same mean (0 .9590 − 0.9536). The paired bootstrap supplies each share’s uncertainty — architecture: ∆(SpatialBase − TrunkCtrl) −0.0038, CI [-0.0116, +0.0039], no detectable architecture penalty; recipe(+auxiliary losses): ∆(TrunkCtrl − spatial-residual) +0 .0490, CI [+0.0294, +0.0705], significant — with the caveat that both bootstrap contrasts average TrunkCtrl’s per-video scores over its three seeds before pairing, a different estimand from the single-run point split above, so they do not sum to 0.0451. Point split and intervals agree on the reading: the trunk gap is recipe-dominant (≈88% recipe by the point split; the only share whose interval excludes zero is the recipe’s). 

Fair-N (the fair frequency test): the identical full frequency stack — DCT + phase streams, estimator-conditioned band gate, CMAM fusion — with the adversary off, zero invariance/geometry losses, flat curriculum, uniform lr 2 ×10 −4, 30 epochs. Result: c40 0.9586 vs SpatialBase 0.9590 

— ∆ = −0.0004, CI [-0.0092, +0.0080]: no detectable difference, and in its symmetric 3-seed form (Section 7.3) equivalent within a post-hoc ±1 pt margin given these three seeds per arm. Against the shipped-recipe equivalent (CAFRL −adv, 0.9190, seed 42), the fair recipe alone bought + 0.0396 ,CI [+0.0231, +0.0570] — significant. These are two different contrasts and should be read as such: the STOP-gate deficit is SpatialBase against CAFRL as specified (+0 .0366), while the recovery is Fair-N against CAFRL −adv (+0 .0396), the shipped-recipe arm built from Fair-N’s own components. Read together they say the “machinery hurts” deficit was the recipe (uncalibrated auxiliary losses + unmatched optimization), not the frequency content. 

7.2 Frequency is discriminative on its own but adds no marginal value 

Fair-W (frequency at full strength): the backbone’s full 1280-d representation drives the primary logit (repairing D4); the frequency representation enters as a zero-initialized γ-residual; an auxiliary BCE on the standalone frequency logit supplies label gradient regardless of γ (repairing D2). Result: c40 0.9645 vs SpatialBase 0.9590 — ∆ = +0 .0056, CI [-0.0022, +0.0134], P (∆ >0) = 0 .93: a lean, not a win — descriptive, within two standard errors of zero, and smaller than the effect this design could resolve. It is the first CAFRL variant ≥ SpatialBase at every level, and no rule in this paper licenses a claim from it. The mechanism readouts (Fig. 4) settle why the tie occurs. The γ-deadlock is genuinely broken: at seed 42, γ grows to 0.146 by epoch 6, stands at 0.140 at the selected checkpoint (epoch 5) and decays to 0.031 by epoch 30 — a decline, never the shipped-recipe probe’s collapse from 0.135 to 0.003 across the curriculum shock at epochs 11–12 (seeds 1 and 2 peak at 0.158 and 0.151, same shape). And the 

frequency-stream sub-network is individually discriminative : its standalone head’s validation AUC (3-seed mean) rises from 0.81/0.71 (c23/c40) at epoch 1 to 0.97/0.85 at the selected checkpoint and plateaus at ≈0.98/ ≈0.91 over the second half of training. The model uses the frequency path, and the frequency sub-network’s own output is discriminative — and conditional on a strong spatial trunk trained on diverse-compression data, its marginal value under this fusion is ≈0. One explanation is thereby excluded: the head reaches ≈0.91 validation AUC at c40 , so the tie is not the tie of a signal that CRF-40 encoding has destroyed. What remains undecided is whether the trunk already carries the information or the fusion never let it speak. Redundant under this fusion — not shown to be absent. 

The conditioned band gate is not idle either. Zero-initialized to the identity ( g ≡ 1), it leaves that initialization at the first logged epoch and never returns: on the c23 validation diagnostic the 11 per-band mean gate at the selected checkpoint spans 0 .25–1 .61 in Fair-N and 1 .37–13 .6 in Fair-W (seed 42), with all three Fair-W seeds learning the same high-band emphasis, roughly an order of magnitude above the low band. The component is therefore exercised in the arms that carry the neutral verdict, which is what the verdict needs; how it re-weights bands as compression increases we still cannot report, the diagnostic being a c23-only pass (Limitations (ii)). Two limits belong here, where the claim is made rather than only in the Limitations. First, this is a fusion result: it shows that adding these streams to this trunk through CMAM or a γ-residual buys nothing measurable, not that the information they carry is missing from the trunk’s own representation. Separating them needs the standalone head’s test-split scores, for a score-level ensemble and an error-overlap analysis; we kept its validation trajectory and not its test predictions. Two further readings are closed off the same way. The amplitude of γ ·zfreq relative to the spatial logit — which would say whether the fusion ever let the branch speak audibly — is unrecoverable, because the logs record γ and the head’s AUC while the evaluation stores only the fused logit. And the arm-invariant selector lands Fair-W at epoch 5 of 30 (6 and 7 at the other seeds), where γ peaks but the standalone head is still ≈6 pt below its own c40 plateau; no later checkpoint was ever scored on the test split. All three need a fresh forward pass over regenerated crops, which we did not run: the crops were deleted after the campaign and the release carries the metadata to regenerate them, not the crops. Second, the standalone head shows that the sub-network is discriminative, not that what it exploits is specifically frequency: no matched-capacity pixel-domain CNN was trained on the same crops as a control, and the training diagnostics log the combined head only, so the block-DCT and FFT-phase contributions are not separated either. 

7.3 Seed confirmation (3 vs 3) 

Fair-N and Fair-W were re-run at two additional seeds (configs differing only in the seed), making every contrast against the 3-seed SpatialBase pool symmetric (Table 3; per-seed values in Appendix A). Per-arm 3-seed c40 means: SpatialBase 0 .9565 ± 0.0160, Fair-N 0 .9563 ± 0.0062, Fair-W 0 .9619 ±

0.0058 (95% t-bands, k=3 seeds). Fair-W’s lean is pinned at +0 .22 pt pooled (+0 .54 pt seed-mean); it is never significant and below the smallest effect this design could resolve ( ≈0.9 pt at the video level, 

≈1.5–1 .7 pt across seeds). Its sign depends on the comparator: each Fair-W seed exceeds SpatialBase’s 3-seed mean and eight of the nine cross-seed pairs are positive, but matched by seed index — which is not an experimental pairing — one of the three is negative (+0 .55, −0.12, +1 .17 pt). Descriptively, both fair variants varied less across seeds than the plain backbone; with three seeds per arm we do not test that difference. Both pooled contrasts also pass the equivalence test their neutral verdicts imply, which an interval containing zero does not by itself establish: their entire 90% intervals lie inside a post-hoc ±1 AUC-point margin ( pTOST = 0 .001 and 0 .006 at the published resampling unit, worst case 0 .010 across the four cluster-level units), given these three seeds per arm . That margin is set at the scale of this study’s own across-seed noise — SpatialBase’s c40 standard deviation over three runs is 0 .645 pt — and on nothing else; both tests are post hoc and sit outside the confirmatory family, and under the stricter reading that folds them into it, Fair-W’s does not survive multiplicity adjustment. Resampling the seeds as well, equivalence within one point is no longer concluded — three seeds fix the arms compared, not the population of seeds they were drawn from. Appendix E gives the margin’s justification, both readings of the adjustment, both interval sets, and the seed-resampled result. 

7.4 Generalization checks: one closed, one unresolved 

Out of distribution (train FF++ multi-CRF, test elsewhere), read at three seeds as the mean ± its 95% t-band: CAFRL ≈ its matched backbone on Celeb-DF v2 (0 .705 ± 0.051 vs 0 .686 ± 0.035) — the 12 one genuinely cross-dataset corpus here — and on near-domain DFD, which shares FF++’s capture and processing lineage rather than being an independent corpus (c23 0 .819 ± 0.040 vs 0 .825 ± 0.054; c40 0 .635 ± 0.035 vs 0 .650 ± 0.031). No paired contrast is computable on any of these cells, so nothing here is adjudicated: we report them descriptively, and note that the bands overlap everywhere — which under this paper’s own standard (Section 4) is evidence of nothing beyond the exclusion of a very large effect. How large: with the seed as the experimental unit at k=3 these cells resolve ≈4 pt (SpatialBase on Celeb-DF v2, across-seed s = 1 .4 pt) to ≈20 pt (Fair-N, s = 6 .8 pt), three to fourteen times coarser than the ≈1.5 pt the same calculation gives on FF++ c40. On Celeb-DF v2 the point estimates in fact order the arms opposite to FF++ (CAFRL as specified 0.705 against SpatialBase’s 0.686) — the reversal Limitation (i) warns of, on the one cell that tests it, though not detectably at this resolution. The larger Xception, a single seed-42 run not comparable to those bands, is ahead on both DFD levels (0.881 / 0.688) and level on Celeb-DF (0.702). The four replicated arms sit at 0.65–0.83 rather than the 0.96 of the intra-dataset comparisons (0.63–0.88 including the Xception row), leaving far more room for an ordering to reverse — and DFDC and WildDeepfake, which would test that, were not run. Full tables in Appendix D. 

Unseen manipulation (FaceShifter, held out; n=280 videos — one 2020 face-swap method on the same FF++ footage, which is the whole of this axis): no advantage is detected, at either recipe. The gate was directional and frozen before any fair-variant FaceShifter number existed: a generalization claim attaches only if the paired-∆ 95% CI excludes zero in the favorable direction, and otherwise the result is a reported lean, not a claim — the same directional form the STOP-gate used (“excludes 0 on the positive side”). Under that rule the shipped-recipe 3-seed check’s +2 .2 pt c40 lean never reached significance; the fair variants’ single-seed leans were sign-inconsistent; and with all seeds pooled both fair variants sit below the backbone. Read symmetrically, that unfavorable direction is a finding of the same kind and we report it under the same discipline, including where that discipline costs us the finding: descriptively, a pooled disadvantage on the single held-out manipulation tested — significant unadjusted for both fair variants and surviving multiplicity adjustment for one of them, 

given these three seeds per arm , but not significant for either once the seeds are resampled as well (Fair-N −0.0325, CI [-0.0899, +0.0342]; Fair-W −0.0317, [-0.0827, +0.0204]), because between-seed spread dominates on this axis. The deficit is therefore no better established than the leans this paper retires, and we retire it by the same rule (Appendices D and E). Across shipped and fair recipes, three seeds each, no unseen-manipulation advantage was detected at any recipe tested ; we report the axis closed in the direction the hypothesis needed it open. Appendix D gives every cell, delta and interval. 

# 8 What actually buys robustness to H.264 re-encoding 

Two results, both significant, carry the constructive story — read throughout as robustness under single-pass H.264 CRF re-encoding , the only compression this study applies: 1. Data diversity flattens the curve for every architecture. All fairly trained multi-CRF models — with or without frequency machinery — share the same flat degradation (clean-anchored drop 0.015–0.019: SpatialBase 0.016, TrunkCtrl 0.019, Fair-N 0.017, Fair-W 0.015; CAFRL as specified 0.026 — seed-42 runs, TrunkCtrl at its 3-seed mean). Meanwhile the c23-trained literature protocol collapses at c40 (Xception 0.866, F3-Net 0.860, FreqNet 0.768 video-AUC). The lever is what the model sees , not what it computes . What this demonstrates is precisely coverage : every heavy evaluation level (c28–c40) lies inside the training distribution, and the only held-out level, c18, is lighter than anything hard. It is not evidence of generalization to unseen degradation, and we do not present it as such. It is also in-corpus . Every arm 13 above loses 13–19 points across the same two CRF levels on near-domain DFD (Table 9; e.g. SpatialBase 0.825 to 0.650, Xception-mq 0.881 to 0.688) against 2–5 points on FF++, so the clean-anchored drop computed there would read 0.13–0.19, not 0.015–0.019. Multi-CRF training bought a flat curve on the corpus the diversity was drawn from ; whether it flattens the curve elsewhere is untested, and these are two-level drops rather than sweeps, no CRF ladder having been generated outside the FF++ family. 2. Real re-encodes beat synthetic proxies. Training with synthetic JPEG-quality augmen-tation — the common shortcut — reaches only 0.890 [0.861, 0.916] at real H.264 c40 where identical training on real CRF variants reaches 0.963 [0.948, 0.976]: + 7.3 pt, non-overlapping CIs (Appendix C; both Xception, both flip-only, one run each ). It is the one headline in this paper that is not replicated across seeds: a single run per arm, at a single level, where this design’s seed-level resolution is ≈1.5–1 .7 pt — the gap exceeds that by roughly fivefold, which is why we report it, and the reader should weigh it knowing the replication is absent. JPEG is not an adequate stand-in for H.264 at heavy compression. This is the one comparison in the study whose test distribution differs in kind from its training distribution, and therefore the genuine distribution-shift result behind claim C2 — as well as the reason not to assume that robustness measured on one codec transfers to another. It is also the one contrast adjudicated on marginal rather than paired intervals: its rule, frozen with the rest of the plan, declared a gap on non-overlapping intervals or a ≥2 pt difference, and the synthetic-augmentation arm’s per-video scores were not retained, so the paired bootstrap the other twelve contrasts use is not computable here. Appendix E carries a deliberately conservative unpaired test in its place. A note the adversarial-invariance line should weigh: on multi-CRF data the compression-discriminative features the GRL is designed to remove are useful , and the adversary also silently degraded its own conditioning signal (the compression estimator’s ±1-bin accuracy fell from 0.88 to 

≈0.4 under the GRL, and was healthy without it). Invariance enforcement is not merely unnecessary here; it works against the conditioning mechanism it is meant to serve. 

# 9 Discussion 

Why publish a negative? Because the field’s default response to compression is architectural, and our controlled evidence says the leverage is in the data. Every ingredient of CAFRL is individually prescribed by prior literature; the assembly and its recipe are ours, and tested against a properly matched control the ensemble adds nothing detectable — while the apparent 3.66-point deficit at c40 (the plain backbone over CAFRL as specified) was manufactured by the recipe (uncalibrated auxiliary losses, curriculum-induced optimization mismatch) rather than by the frequency content. Both facts are cautionary in opposite directions: architecture enthusiasm can be empty, and negative results can be artifacts. The only way we know to distinguish these is the discipline used here. The genre itself needs the precedent: negative results remain structurally under-published in machine learning despite explicit calls to normalize them [24], and the systemic cost of the missing negatives is measurable — in a neighboring applied-ML field, 79% of papers claiming to beat standard methods compared against weak baselines, with reporting biases suppressing the failures [30]. Our augmentation and capacity confounds (Section 5.2) are precisely that weak-baseline failure mode, caught in flight only because the controls were matched before the comparison was believed. 

What made the negative trustworthy. Three practices did the work — pre-registered gates, matched controls, and auditing our own negative as an adversary would — and the practice list 14 at the end of this section states each as something a reader can adopt. What is worth pricing here is that they were cheap: the STOP-gate saved ∼270 h of ablation training on a dead thesis, closing the researcher-degrees-of-freedom loophole frozen analysis plans exist to close [22, 27]; the two confounds would each have flipped the headline; and the audit and its re-tests cost ∼35 h plus ∼31 h of confirmation seeds. We propose the audit-the-negative protocol as a template: a negative about a fashionable architecture should be published with the audit that tried to kill it. 

What the campaign cost. All timings are wall-clock training hours on one 2 ×A100-40 GB node; CAFRL arms run distributed across both cards ( ≈7.1–8 .5 h each), baselines and controls on one (≈3–5 h each). The falsification campaign, the four fair re-tests and the six confirmation seeds together executed every run reported in this paper. No run failed or was aborted , and the only compute superseded rather than reported is the pair of flip-only literature baselines ( b1 xception lit fliponly , b2 f3net lit fliponly ), which are reported here anyway as the augmentation comparison of Appendix C. Twenty-seven training runs stand behind this paper. We did not keep a single audited ledger of total consumed compute across the campaign, and we do not reconstruct one here: an estimate multiplied out of per-run times would be an arithmetic exercise rather than a measurement, and this paper’s own argument is that the two should not be confused. The per-run selected epochs, curves and configurations that let a reader price it are released. 

Where the next lever probably is. One side-observation points past compression — and it is the one recommendation in this paper resting on a number the reader must take on our word, so we grade it before we use it: a single-seed observation whose paired contrast is recorded in the campaign journal and is not re-derivable from the released artifacts, because that follow-up did not persist its per-video scores (audit defect D8). With that grade attached: the highest-capacity spatial model in this study, Xception, wins every intra-dataset cell yet gives up ∼11 pt to the smaller models on the held-out FaceShifter manipulation at c23: capacity spent on the manipulations it was trained on buys nothing on one it has never seen. The contrast is ∆(CAFRL as specified − Xception-mq) at FaceShifter c23 = +0 .113, 95% CI [+0.064, +0.162], n=280; we print it with the provenance above rather than silently or not at all. That is the compression lesson again on a second axis — what binds is what the training distribution covers — which makes multi-manipulation (and multi-generator) training the natural successor to multi-CRF training. It also meets the frequency-generalization literature head-on: spectral features are argued there to mitigate exactly this texture-overfitting failure [11, 13, 16], and our own fair frequency variants did not mitigate it either (Section 7.4). 

Where these systems stand. A redundancy verdict is only as interesting as the system it is rendered on, so it is worth saying where ours sits. SpatialBase is not the strongest detector in this study: Xception-mq clears it by 0.4 pt at c40 augmentation-matched (0.9631 vs 0.9590) and by 0.9 pt with the standard policy, at five times the parameters (Appendix C). Out of distribution our replicated arms land at 0.65–0.70 on Celeb-DF v2, which is below the published record at every comparison we can find: the single-harness FF++-trained CNN detectors of [2] run 0.73–0.765 there (three to eleven points above ours, frame-level where ours are video-level), and the cross-dataset frontier, video-level like ours, is 82.4 for LipForensics [31], 86.9 for RealForensics [32] and 93.2 for self-blended-image training [33], all FF++-trained. Those buy their generalization with mouth-motion pretraining, audio-visual self-supervision and synthetic blending supervision, none of which is in scope here — but the gap is 12 to 23 AUC points and should be read as such. The redundancy verdict is therefore rendered at one operating point : a 4–21 M CNN trained on FaceForensics++ with multi-CRF diversity, 

≈0.96 intra-dataset and ≈0.70 cross-dataset — a mid-field system, not a frontier one. Whether a frequency path earns its keep on a substantially stronger or weaker system is not something these 15 experiments can say. The intra-dataset yardstick has no published protocol-matched anchor at all: we know of no other multi-CRF-trained, video-level c40 report of these detectors, which is why that comparison is calibrated internally, against Xception-mq. 

Reconciling the published positives. Several works report that frequency or compression-invariance machinery helps, and this study reports that it does not. The two are not in direct contradiction, and the reason is visible in what those works controlled. Table 5 audits the five we cite most directly on two questions: was the baseline they beat trained on the same compression-diverse data, and was it matched in capacity? Two patterns run through the table, stated at the strength its cells support. None of the four detection papers reports a parameter count or a FLOP figure, so capacity matching cannot be verified 

from any of them; only SPSL’s design permits the comparison to be made by inspection, and its row records that it is made. And none trains a plain spatial backbone on compression-diverse data — two of them, F3-Net and SPSL, never train on diverse data at all, which makes the question this paper asks structurally unaskable inside their designs, while Cao et al. and PLADA train on diverse data but never against a plain-trunk control. That is not a charge of error: their comparisons answer the question they posed, whether the mechanism helps at a fixed compression level . It does mean our result and theirs are compatible under a hypothesis we can state but did not test — that compression-invariance machinery substitutes for training-data diversity and earns its keep exactly where that diversity is missing. Every positive in the table was measured in that regime; every arm here was not. The practical reading follows: if you can diversify your training compression, do that first, and this machinery is not where your next point comes from; if you cannot, this study says nothing about you. Deciding between that hypothesis and the alternative — that the machinery adds nothing at either data regime — needs a single-level-plus-invariance arm we did not run, and we flag it untested rather than argue it. 

Limitations. (i) Training and intra-dataset evaluation are FaceForensics++-family. DFD is near-domain rather than cross-dataset — it shares FF++’s capture and processing lineage — so the only genuinely cross-dataset check is Celeb-DF v2, and DFDC [14] and WildDeepfake [15] were not run. Ties at 0.70 AUC leave far more room for an ordering to reverse than ties at 0.96 do, and we cannot exclude that a broader out-of-distribution battery would separate arms that are indistinguishable here. (ii) “Frequency” in this paper means one instantiation: 8 ×8 block-DCT and FFT-phase streams, an estimator-conditioned band gate, and CMAM or γ-residual fusion, trained at the matched recipe. Families we did not test include SRM and noise-residual features fused inside the trunk [13], learnable filter banks, wavelet decompositions, fusion at earlier network depths, decode-side (coefficient-domain, grid-aligned) DCT, and score-level ensembling of separately trained spatial and frequency models. Our block-DCT is also codec-naive by construction, and this is one concrete way the instantiation could be a weak representative of its family: the crop is an interpolated similarity warp of the decoded frame, so the encoder’s 8 ×8 transform grid is neither aligned with nor preserved in it, and H.264’s in-loop deblocking has already smoothed the block boundaries a DCT-domain detector would key on. Our design-time band-energy check measures the consequence only in aggregate — mean |DCT coefficient | per zigzag index over 400 crops at c0 and c40, real and fake pooled, showing the expected high-band attenuation (band ratios 0.99, 0.80, 0.82, 0.86 low to high) — and says nothing about whether what separates real from fake survives it, which is the question a band analysis would have to answer. Nor can we report how the learned band gate reweights bands as compression increases: the training diagnostics evaluate the gate on a c23-only validation pass, so the released series is a trajectory over epochs at one compression level, not a profile across levels — enough to establish that the gate departs from its identity initialization and to show its learned band profile (Section 7.2), 16 not enough to show it conditioning on compression, which is the property its design claims. Both gaps need a fresh evaluation pass over regenerated crops, which we did not run. (iii) The fair recipe is the baseline’s recipe applied symmetrically, which is what makes the comparison fair and also what bounds it: no hyper-parameter search was run on the frequency side, every frequency gate starts zero-initialized, checkpoint selection lands early (epoch ≈5 for the full-trunk variant), and every fair arm runs with the adversary off — so adversarial invariance is untested at the fair recipe rather than refuted there. (iv) Codec, and the corpus × compression cell. Compression here is single-pass H.264 CRF re-encoding and every heavy evaluation level is inside the training distribution; H.265, AV1, multi-pass encoding and platform transcode chains are untested, and this paper’s own JPEG-versus-H.264 result is the reason not to assume they transfer. The two axes are never crossed either: no compression-stratified evaluation exists outside the FF++ family — DFD supplies two levels but is near-domain, and Celeb-DF v2 carries whatever compression its videos came with — so C1’s neutrality across compression levels and C2’s lever are both untested cross-dataset. (v) Scale. 

The trunk here is one 4.0 M 2019-era CNN, evaluated at two spatial-feature widths; foundation-model trunks — frozen CLIP features with light adapters [18, 19] — are untested in either direction. Our own out-of-distribution table says the axis is live: from the 4.0 M control to the 20.8 M Xception buys 0.4 pt intra-dataset but ≈4.6 pt at DFD-c23 and ≈2.4 pt at DFD-c40 (Table 9) — larger than any frequency effect here, though that Xception is one seed against three-seed bands. One reading of our mechanism — that a spatial trunk trained on diverse compression subsumes what these frequency streams contribute, which is precisely the reading Section 7.2 says we did not test — predicts as an extrapolation, from an untested premise, and not as a result that a bolted-on frequency branch matters even less as the trunk grows stronger; the opposite is equally arguable, since a frozen trunk cannot adapt its features to compression and a trainable branch might therefore matter more. Which way it goes is the obvious next experiment, not something this study settles. (vi) Era. Every manipulation evaluated here is GAN- or graphics-era (FF++ 2019–2020 swaps and reenactments, FaceShifter held out); no diffusion-generated video is tested, and spectral signatures are generator-dependent, so the redundancy verdict is era-bound. What is not era-bound is the protocol — pre-registered gates, matched controls, auditing one’s own negative — and the compression lesson itself, that real codec diversity in training beats a synthetic proxy, which is a statement about the codec rather than about the generator. (vii) The neutral verdicts rest on three seeds per arm: they are equivalence claims within a post-hoc ±1 pt margin given those seeds , with a resolution floor of ≈0.9 pt at the video level and ≈1.5 pt across seeds, and equivalence does not survive resampling the seeds themselves (Appendix E). Mapped onto the four claims: C1 and C4 rest on FF++ plus one held-out manipulation, near-domain DFD and cross-dataset Celeb-DF v2 (no paired contrast out of distribution; DFDC and WildDeepfake untested), at single-pass H.264 CRF, on GAN- and graphics-era content and non-foundation trunks; C2 adds the one tested shift in kind and no second codec; C3, the protocol, is method-level and assumes nothing about data, manipulation family, codec or era. 

Implications for practice. If the apparatus is the transferable part, it should be stated as something a reader can adopt. Five items, each with where this paper instantiates it. (1) Match the control on data, capacity, augmentation and optimization recipe before you believe a win — two of the first three were live confounds here and each would have flipped the headline on its own (Section 5.2, Appendix C), and the fourth was worth more than all of them: the recipe manufactured ≈88% of the gap we first attributed to architecture. The reusable control is TrunkCtrl: train the candidate’s own trunk, alone, under the comparator’s recipe, and report the resulting recipe/architecture split before attributing any gap to architecture (Section 7.1). (2) Freeze the decision rule, and freeze a comparison type rather than a checkpoint — a rule naming “the strongest baseline” survives the comparator you have not built yet; a rule naming a run does 17 not (Section 4). (3) Watch two training-health invariants — no auxiliary loss should exceed the classification loss by more than about an order of magnitude, and any conditioning signal the model consumes should be checked for accuracy during training, not only at design time; both failures were silent here and both biased the result (Section 6, D1 and D6), and both now ship as warnings in the released code. (4) Probe redundancy with a standalone head before concluding a component is useless — a branch whose removal costs nothing may still be individually discriminative (ours plateaus at 0.91–0.98 alone, and reads 0.97/0.85 at c23/c40 at the selected checkpoint). That rules out “there is nothing here” and leaves two live readings — “the trunk already has this” and “the fusion never let it speak” — which have different implications for what to try next and are separated only by a score-level ensemble and an error-overlap analysis, which we did not run (Section 7.2). (5) Audit your own negative as an adversary would, before publishing it — four of the eight defects we found were biased against the hypothesis we had just rejected, and the deficit they produced was larger than the effect under study (Section 6, Appendix B). 

# 10 Conclusion 

We set out to build a compression-robust deepfake detector on two widely prescribed ingredients — frequency streams and adversarial compression-invariance — and instead established, under pre-registered and pre-specified rules and matched controls, that: 1. CAFRL as specified lost to its recipe, not to frequency (+3 .96 pt at c40 recovered by the fair recipe alone, Fair-N vs. CAFRL −adv at seed 42, significant); 2. at a fair recipe, our frequency path — block-DCT and FFT-phase streams under CMAM or γ-residual fusion — makes no detectable difference : discriminative in isolation (standalone validation AUC 0.91–0.98 late in training, 0.97/0.85 at the selected checkpoint) but of no marginal value under this fusion, at two spatial-feature widths of a single 4.0 M 2019-era CNN trunk — foundation-model trunks untested, Limitation (v) (3v3 pooled ∆ 

−0.10 / +0 .22 pt at c40, CIs include 0; equivalent within a post-hoc, unadjusted ±1 pt margin given these three seeds per arm, against a resolution floor of ≈0.9 pt at the video level and 

≈1.5–1 .7 pt across seeds). What that excludes is a frequency gain of the size this literature advertises at low quality; what it does not exclude is one of the size of the fairest published frequency ablation (+1 .4 pt, Table 5). We did not test whether the information is absent from the trunk, only that adding it here buys nothing; 3. robustness under single-pass H.264 CRF re-encoding is bought by data diversity 

(real-CRF training ≫ synthetic JPEG augmentation, +7 .3 pt, single runs — the one comparison here with a genuine train/test distribution shift). The flat degradation curve that accompanies it is an in-corpus result: the same arms drop 13–19 points across the same two CRF levels on near-domain DFD; 4. the adversarial invariance, as specified and at the shipped recipe, added nothing and damaged its own conditioning estimator — it was not re-tested at the fair recipe, where it is therefore untested rather than refuted; 5. no unseen-manipulation generalization advantage was detected at any recipe tested 

— and, descriptively, a pooled disadvantage on the single held-out manipulation tested, significant unadjusted given these three seeds per arm, though not once the seeds themselves are resampled. Neither direction of this axis is established. 18 The negative that survives this process is smaller than the one that entered the audit — “machinery hurts” became “the recipe hurt; this frequency path adds no detectable value under this fusion” — and that is precisely the version worth the community’s trust. 

# Acknowledgment 

This work was developed within the Center of Data Analytics Research (CeDAR) and the MegaSec AI Laboratory at ADA University. 

# Data availability 

The three video corpora used here are not public downloads : they are released by their authors under data-use agreements that a requester signs. FaceForensics++ [1] (from which the DFD / DeepFakeDetection set is also distributed, at c23 and c40) and Celeb-DF v2 [21] are each obtained from their authors through those agreements. We redistribute no video, no frame and no face crop. What we do release makes the evaluation set reconstructible byte for byte from those corpora. Face crops come from a fixed pipeline: SCRFD detection [34] (InsightFace buffalo l ), per-video track curation — automatic diff-vote track selection with dynamic-time-warping alignment for DFD, manual adjudication for the 31 multi-person FaceForensics++ originals — and a similarity warp of the five detected landmarks onto fixed reference points in a 256 ×256 canvas ( cv2.warpAffine , BORDER REPLICATE ), not a bounding-box crop. Thirty-two frames per video are chosen deterministically, by 

linspace over the frames in which a face was detected, and the same rule is used by the re-crop, the index builder and the evaluation loader, so every arm sees the same frames. The release carries the official split identity lists and the per-video crop metadata (per-frame bounding boxes, five-point landmarks and detection confidences) that the warp consumes, which is what makes the regeneration deterministic rather than approximate. The compression ladder is real H.264, produced with FFmpeg 4.2.2 (libavcodec 58.54.100) and x264 core 157, one invocation per source video and target level:      

> ffmpeg -y -i <source.mp4 >-c:v libx264 -crf <CRF >-preset medium -pix fmt yuv420p -threads 8 -vsync passthrough -an <out.mp4 >

for CRF ∈ { 28 , 32 , 36 } on every FaceForensics++ core video and CRF 18 on the test split; c0 is the lossless source and the distributed c23 and c40 encodes are used as published. -preset medium is fixed because FaceForensics++ published none; -vsync passthrough preserves the one-to-one frame correspondence the cross-level crops depend on. The full encoder banner, the applied x264 settings line and every pipeline script are in the release. 

# Reproducibility statement 

Every decision rule in this paper was frozen before the run it governed, at one of two grades: the STOP-gate and the ablation win-rule were pre-registered (git-tagged before any result of the campaign existed), and each audit re-test’s rule was pre-specified (journaled before its own run, after the audit). Both sets of frozen texts are released verbatim, with the commit history that places each before the runs it governed. 

Checkpoint selection used one rule for every arm in the paper, fixed in the two training drivers before the campaign began and never varied per arm: after each epoch, validate on the official 19 FaceForensics++ validation split at c23 and c40 and keep the epoch maximizing 12 (AUC c23 + AUC c40 ), strict improvement, ties to the earlier epoch. The only difference between arm families is which weights are scored: CAFRL arms maintain an exponential-moving-average copy and select on it, baselines and controls train no EMA and select on the raw weights. No test-split quantity enters selection anywhere. Selection lands early for Fair-W — epoch 5 of 30 at seed 42, 6 and 7 at the other two — which is also where its residual gate γ peaks, and we say so rather than presenting the selected checkpoint as a steady state: γ is 0.140 at the selected epoch and 0.031 at epoch 30 (Section 7.2, Fig. 4). Every run’s per-epoch validation curve and its selected epoch — recomputed from the released curve and cross-checked against the checkpoint’s own metadata — are in the release. 

Video scores and pairing. A video’s score is the mean of its 32 per-frame fake logits; the pooling key is the (video, manipulation) pair, so one source video appearing under four manipulations stays four distinct evaluation units. Because frame selection is deterministic and shared, the frame set behind a given video’s score is identical across every arm, which is what makes the paired bootstrap meaningful: each replicate draws one video-index vector and scores both arms on it. 

What is released. Per-video predictions for every FF++ cell; the frozen preregistration/ 

and audit/ texts with the commit history that orders them; every run’s configuration, validation curve and selected epoch (27 runs); the evaluation harness (paired bootstrap, seed pooling, cluster and equivalence analyses) with its outputs; the benchmark, calibration and out-of-distribution companions; the parameter-count generator; the crop metadata, split lists and re-encode pipeline; and a claims map tying every number this paper prints — prose numbers included, among them the D6 estimator accuracies, the band-energy ratios and the γ trajectories — to an artifact path and a command. A self-containment test re-derives the printed values from those artifacts alone and fails the build if one disagrees. Checkpoints (6.0 GB, 37 files) ship in the archival deposit with the crop coordinates. Code is MIT-licensed, predictions and metadata CC BY 4.0; regenerated crops inherit the source corpora’s agreement terms even though the coordinates that regenerate them are shareable. 

What is not re-derivable. Three sets of cells carry no per-video scores — the out-of-distribution cells of Table 9, the synthetic-JPEG arm, and the FaceShifter follow-up contrast of Section 9 — all audit defect D8, whose backfill reached only the FF++ cells. Other analyses this paper flags as absent (the standalone head’s test scores, the gate’s profile across levels, a paired test for the training-data contrast, out-of-distribution paired contrasts) are computable in principle from the released checkpoints and metadata; what prevented them is that the face crops were deleted after the campaign, so each needs the corpora re-obtained and the crops regenerated first. We write “we did not run”, not “not computable”, wherever that is the reason. 

Environment and tolerances. Training and evaluation used bfloat16 mixed precision with float32 islands in the frequency and loss paths. Re-deriving the reported numbers from the released scores is exact and needs no GPU; re-running a checkpoint reproduces scores to small numerical differences rather than bit-identically; re-training is bit-exact only in the deterministic mode, which forces float32 and single-worker loading. The released lockfile pins the stack, and the repository states the tolerance each layer is checked at. 

Where it is. The repository — code, per-video predictions, the frozen rule texts, the evaluation and analysis harness, and the claims map — is https://github.com/Capta1n-n9m0/cafrl-negative ,at tagged release v1.0.0 . The archival deposit, which adds the model checkpoints and the crop coordi-nates to that tagged tree, is https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.22032529 (DOI 10.5281/zenodo.22032529 ). 

# Generative AI disclosure 

Generative artificial intelligence tools were used in the preparation of this work, under author direction and with author verification of every resulting claim, including the self-audit of Section 6 — four 20 author-directed, tool-assisted review passes, documented in the audit/ directory of the released artifact repository — and assistance in code development and analysis tooling. All experiments, decision rules, analyses and conclusions are the authors’ own, and the authors take full responsibility for the content of this article. 

# Declaration of competing interest 

The authors declare no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper. 

# References 

[1] A. R¨ ossler, D. Cozzolino, L. Verdoliva, C. Riess, J. Thies, M. Nießner, FaceForensics++: Learning to detect manipulated facial images, in: Proc. IEEE/CVF Int. Conf. Comput. Vis. (ICCV), 2019, pp. 1–11. [2] Z. Yan, Y. Zhang, X. Yuan, S. Lyu, B. Wu, DeepfakeBench: A comprehensive benchmark of deepfake detection, in: Proc. Adv. Neural Inf. Process. Syst. (NeurIPS), Datasets and Benchmarks Track, 2023. [3] Y. Ganin, V. Lempitsky, Unsupervised domain adaptation by backpropagation, in: Proc. Int. Conf. Mach. Learn. (ICML), 2015, pp. 1180–1189. [4] S. Cao, Q. Zou, X. Mao, Z. Wang, Metric learning for anti-compression facial forgery detection, in: Proc. ACM Int. Conf. Multimedia (ACM MM), 2021, pp. 1929–1937. [5] L. Ma, Y. Zhao, P. Peng, Y. Tian, Sensitivity decouple learning for image compression artifacts reduction, IEEE Trans. Image Process. 33 (2024) 3620–3633. doi:10.1109/TIP.2024.3403034 .[6] M. Li, R. Tao, Y. Liu, C. Tan, H. Qin, B. Li, Y. Wei, Y. Zhao, Pay less attention to deceptive artifacts: Robust detection of compressed deepfakes on online social networks, arXiv:2506.20548 (Jun. 2025). [7] J. Frank, T. Eisenhofer, L. Sch¨ onherr, A. Fischer, D. Kolossa, T. Holz, Leveraging frequency analysis for deep fake image recognition, in: Proc. Int. Conf. Mach. Learn. (ICML), 2020, pp. 3247–3258. [8] R. Durall, M. Keuper, J. Keuper, Watch your up-convolution: CNN based generative deep neural networks are failing to reproduce spectral distributions, in: Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit. (CVPR), 2020, pp. 7890–7899. [9] E. Perez, F. Strub, H. de Vries, V. Dumoulin, A. Courville, FiLM: Visual reasoning with a general conditioning layer, in: Proc. AAAI Conf. Artif. Intell., 2018, pp. 3942–3951. [10] Y. Qian, G. Yin, L. Sheng, Z. Chen, J. Shao, Thinking in frequency: Face forgery detection by mining frequency-aware clues, in: Proc. Eur. Conf. Comput. Vis. (ECCV), 2020, pp. 86–103. [11] H. Liu, X. Li, W. Zhou, Y. Chen, Y. He, H. Xue, W. Zhang, N. Yu, Spatial-phase shallow learning: Rethinking face forgery detection in frequency domain, in: Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit. (CVPR), 2021, pp. 772–781. 21 [12] L. Zhao, M. Zhang, H. Ding, X. Cui, Fine-grained deepfake detection based on cross-modality attention, Neural Comput. Appl. 35 (2023) 10617–10631. doi:10.1007/s00521-023-08271-z .[13] Y. Luo, Y. Zhang, J. Yan, W. Liu, Generalizing face forgery detection with high-frequency features, in: Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit. (CVPR), 2021. doi: 10.1109/CVPR46437.2021.01605 .[14] B. Dolhansky, J. Bitton, B. Pflaum, J. Lu, R. Howes, M. Wang, C. Canton Ferrer, The deepfake detection challenge (DFDC) dataset, arXiv:2006.07397 (Jun. 2020). [15] B. Zi, M. Chang, J. Chen, X. Ma, Y.-G. Jiang, WildDeepfake: A challenging real-world dataset for deepfake detection, in: Proc. 28th ACM Int. Conf. Multimedia (MM), 2020, pp. 2382–2390. [16] C. Tan, Y. Zhao, S. Wei, G. Gu, P. Liu, Y. Wei, Frequency-aware deepfake detection: Improving generalizability through frequency space domain learning, in: Proc. AAAI Conf. Artif. Intell., 2024, pp. 5052–5060. [17] C. Yuan, Y. Chen, Z. Zhou, Z. Xia, Y. Huang, Compressed domain invariant adversarial representation learning for robust audio deepfake detection, IEEE Signal Process. Lett. 32 (2025) 1111–1115. doi:10.1109/LSP.2025.3547850 .[18] U. Ojha, Y. Li, Y. J. Lee, Towards universal fake image detectors that generalize across generative models, in: Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit. (CVPR), 2023. [19] H. Liu, et al., Forgery-aware adaptive transformer for generalizable synthetic image detection, in: Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit. (CVPR), 2024. [20] A. Gretton, O. Bousquet, A. Smola, B. Sch¨ olkopf, Measuring statistical dependence with Hilbert-Schmidt norms, in: Proc. Int. Conf. Algorithmic Learn. Theory (ALT), 2005, pp. 63–77. [21] Y. Li, X. Yang, P. Sun, H. Qi, S. Lyu, Celeb-DF: A large-scale challenging dataset for deepfake forensics, in: Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit. (CVPR), 2020, pp. 3207–3216. [22] B. A. Nosek, C. R. Ebersole, A. C. DeHaven, D. T. Mellor, The preregistration revolution, Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. USA 115 (11) (2018) 2600–2606. doi:10.1073/pnas.1708274114 .[23] L. Bertinetto, J. F. Henriques, S. Albanie, M. Paganini, G. Varol (Eds.), NeurIPS 2020 Workshop on Pre-registration in Machine Learning, Vol. 148 of Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, PMLR, 2021. URL https://proceedings.mlr.press/v148/ 

[24] F. Karl, L. M. Kemeter, G. Dax, P. Sierak, Position: Embracing negative results in machine learning, in: Proc. Int. Conf. Mach. Learn. (ICML), Vol. 235 of Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, 2024, pp. 23256–23265. [25] M. Tan, Q. V. Le, EfficientNet: Rethinking model scaling for convolutional neural networks, in: Proc. Int. Conf. Mach. Learn. (ICML), 2019, pp. 6105–6114. [26] L. Li, J. Bao, H. Yang, D. Chen, F. Wen, Advancing high fidelity identity swapping for forgery detection, in: Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit. (CVPR), 2020, pp. 5073–5082. 22 [27] J. P. Simmons, L. D. Nelson, U. Simonsohn, False-positive psychology: Undisclosed flexibility in data collection and analysis allows presenting anything as significant, Psychol. Sci. 22 (11) (2011) 1359–1366. doi:10.1177/0956797611417632 .[28] J. M. Hofman, A. Chatzimparmpas, A. Sharma, D. J. Watts, J. Hullman, Pre-registration for predictive modeling, arXiv:2311.18807 (Nov. 2023). [29] F. Chollet, Xception: Deep learning with depthwise separable convolutions, in: Proc. IEEE Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit. (CVPR), 2017, pp. 1251–1258. [30] N. McGreivy, A. Hakim, Weak baselines and reporting biases lead to overoptimism in machine learning for fluid-related partial differential equations, Nature Mach. Intell. 6 (2024) 1256–1269. 

doi:10.1038/s42256-024-00897-5 .[31] A. Haliassos, K. Vougioukas, S. Petridis, M. Pantic, Lips don’t lie: A generalisable and robust approach to face forgery detection, in: Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit. (CVPR), 2021, pp. 5039–5049. [32] A. Haliassos, R. Mira, S. Petridis, M. Pantic, Leveraging real talking faces via self-supervision for robust forgery detection, in: Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit. (CVPR), 2022, pp. 14950–14962. [33] K. Shiohara, T. Yamasaki, Detecting deepfakes with self-blended images, in: Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit. (CVPR), 2022, pp. 18720–18729. [34] J. Guo, J. Deng, A. Lattas, S. Zafeiriou, Sample and computation redistribution for efficient face detection, in: Proc. Int. Conf. Learn. Represent. (ICLR), 2022. [35] D. J. Schuirmann, A comparison of the Two One-Sided Tests Procedure and the Power Approach for assessing the equivalence of average bioavailability, J. Pharmacokinet. Biopharm. 15 (6) (1987) 657–680. [36] D. Lakens, Equivalence tests: A practical primer for t tests, correlations, and meta-analyses, Soc. Psychol. Personal. Sci. 8 (4) (2017) 355–362. 

# A Per-seed results 

Table 6 gives the per-seed c40 results behind the 3v3 pooled contrasts of Section 7.3. The c40 pooled contrasts are Table 3 rows 5–6; at AUC comp they are −0.0007 [-0.0046, +0.0029] and +0 .0011 [-0.0040, +0.0053]. All include 0. 

# B The complete audit ledger (D1–D8) 

Section 6 describes how the self-audit was run, what it confirmed and what it overturned; this appendix carries only its output. Table 7 is the full ledger; D1–D4 are the four defects biased against 

the frequency hypothesis that Section 6 states in brief. 23 C Baseline reproduction, calibration, and the augmentation con-found 

Calibration against published anchors. Each reproduction was checked against the one published number it can legitimately be read against, in frame-level AUC — the anchors’ own unit, and not 

the video-level unit used everywhere else in this paper. The anchors are DeepfakeBench’s Table 3 [2], the only published measurement of these detectors in one harness under a c23-trained protocol; the FaceForensics++ paper itself reports accuracy , not AUC (c23 95.73 %, c40 81.00 %, a separate model per quality level [1]), and FreqNet has no FF++ anchor at all, being trained on ProGAN images and scored by accuracy and average precision [16] — so our row is, to our knowledge, its first FF++ c23/c40 entry on a video benchmark. Against those anchors our literature-protocol runs (single runs at seed 42) give: Xception 0.9901 at c23 and 0.7915 at c40 (anchor 0.9637 / 0.8261), F3-Net 0.9850 and 0.7802 (anchor 0.9635 / 0.8271), FreqNet 0.9673 and 0.6802 (no anchor). Both reproducible detectors clear their c23 anchor and land 3 .5 and 4 .7 frame-AUC points below it at c40; the released evaluation/CALIBRATION.md tabulates the same numbers with the three cautions in full. That residual was accepted, before the STOP-gate ran, as reproduction variance against a recipe whose exact augmentation parameters, schedule and test-time averaging are not published: our c23 sits above the anchor, so the models are trained, not broken, and at the gate’s own metric — video-level c40 — the strongest literature baseline reaches 0.866, which CAFRL as specified (0.922) clears comfortably. Pushing the residual further by tuning against a published number would have been tuning against the very comparison the gate was about to make. 

What “F3-Net” and “FreqNet” mean here. Both are reimplementations against the published designs, and both carry a documented simplification the cells should be read with: F3-Net is its FAD branch only — full-image DCT, three learnable band-pass filters with the published spectral initialization, inverse DCT, 9-channel stack, 3 →9 widening of an ImageNet-pretrained Xception’s first convolution — without the LFS branch and the MixBlock. That is the same scope as the reference benchmark implementation, whose code states it replicates F3-Net using the FAD branch alone [2] — which makes the frame-level anchor check above like-for-like, and does not make the simplification free. Our build log recorded it as costing about 0.1 AUC point; re-checking for this revision, that figure is the FAD-only-versus-plain-Xception gap in that benchmark (0.8271 vs 0.8261 at c40), not the FAD-only-versus-full-F3-Net gap, which F3-Net’s own low-quality ablation puts at ≈2.6frame-averaged AUC points (0.907 against 0.933) [10]. Our F3-Net rows are therefore a lower bound on full F3-Net by roughly that margin, and the arguments below that lean on them are stated at that strength; and FreqNet is the full design with a single-logit head and its FFT arithmetic forced to float32 , complex tensors not being representable in bfloat16. Both take 256 ×256 crops and the same baseline recipe as every other baseline (AdamW, lr 2 ×10 −4, weight decay 10 −4, 30 epochs, one warm-up epoch, cosine schedule, batch 32, BCE). The full anchor-versus-reproduction table, the three cautions that govern it, and the complete statement of both adaptations are released as evaluation/CALIBRATION.md . FreqNet’s published evaluation is a different problem — ProGAN-generated images scored by accuracy and average precision [16] — so its rows here are an adaptation to a video face-forgery benchmark rather than a reproduction of a published number. 

Which comparators the frozen gate could see. The STOP-gate text quoted in Section 4 was committed before any run of this campaign existed, and it names its comparator by kind : the strongest of the baseline runs then in the plan, adjudicated by a paired-∆ interval at c40. At freeze time that was the six runs of Table 8’s first two blocks — Xception, F3-Net and FreqNet, each under the literature and the mq protocol. SpatialBase did not exist when the rule was frozen: it was 24 constructed later, under the same document’s confound-control provision, once Xception-mq’s win raised the capacity objection, and it is a lower-scoring but more probative comparator than anything on the freeze-time list — lower-scoring, and so arithmetically easier to beat, which is exactly why the gate also fired against the freeze-time best baseline ; more probative because it is the smallest model in the study and the only one built to match CAFRL’s own backbone family, so it removes capacity as an explanation. The gate would have fired on the freeze-time list alone: CAFRL as specified reaches 0.922 at c40 against Xception-mq’s 0.968 and F3-Net-mq’s 0.955. What SpatialBase changed was the reading — it removed capacity as the explanation — not the outcome. 

Do the frequency baselines lose their published ordering? Partly, and the protocol is why. F3-Net’s paper places it 4.0 frame-averaged AUC points ahead of Xception at FF++ LQ (0.933 vs 0.893) [10], but both arms there train and test at c40, whereas our literature protocol trains at c23 and evaluates across the sweep, measuring transfer rather than the published quantity. The one published measurement of the two detectors in a single harness under a c23-trained protocol separates them by 0.1 frame-AUC points at c40, with F3-Net marginally ahead (Xception 0.8261, F3-Net 0.8271 [2]); our reproduction separates them by 1.1 points with Xception ahead (0.7915 vs 0.7802 frame-level, 0.866 vs 0.860 video-level). We do not claim to reproduce that ordering — we invert it. What both measurements agree on is that the two detectors sit within about a point of each other at c40 under this protocol, with the sign unstable, which is the only reading either supports. The evidence that the implementation is not the problem is in the mq protocol: the same F3-Net code, trained on compression-diverse data, reaches 0.955 at c40 and cannot be distinguished from SpatialBase — but that is the FAD branch alone, whose published penalty at low quality is ≈2.6AUC points, so the cell bounds FAD-on-diverse-data from below and does not bound full F3-Net. A protocol-matched (c40-trained) retrain, and a full FAD+LFS+MixBlock mq run, would each test more; both need the training set restored and re-cropped, and we ran neither. 

Literature protocol (c23-trained), and the augmentation policy. Under the standard protocol the reproduced baselines collapse at c40 (video-AUC): Xception 0.866, F3-Net 0.860, FreqNet 0.768. Initial reproductions with flip-only augmentation under-reproduced the published c40 anchors by 6–10 frame-AUC points while overfitting (training loss → 0); adding a standard augmentation policy — random crop, translation, rotation, colour jitter and Gaussian blur, deliberately without 

JPEG compression, which would corrupt the compression signal under study — recovered them, gaining +2 .7 frame-AUC points at c40 for Xception (0 .764 → 0.7915; released runs b1 xception lit fliponly and b1 xception lit ) and +5 .5 for F3-Net (0 .725 → 0.7802; b2 f3net lit fliponly and 

b2 f3net lit ). This is consistent with the central finding of DeepfakeBench [2] that augmentation and implementation details dominate detector comparisons. 

The harmonized benchmark. Table 8 gives every baseline across both protocols on one harness, one metric and one test split — the benchmark behind contribution C4, and the evidence for the data-diversity claim read across architectures rather than within one. Multi-CRF training moves Xception from 0.866 to 0.968 at c40 and F3-Net from 0.860 to 0.955, at a cost of under a point at c23 (0.994 to 0.987 and 0.992 to 0.989); FreqNet gains the most in absolute terms (0.768 to 0.879) and still finishes far below everything else. FreqNet is also the one row trained from scratch — it has no ImageNet initialization, while every other row does — which is a second explanation for its level that its architecture alone does not carry. 

The published frequency architectures, on CAFRL’s data. The two mq frequency rows are the closest external check on this paper’s central comparison that the existing artifacts allow, and 25 they are read against SpatialBase with the same paired video bootstrap used throughout (10,000 replicates, shared index vectors, seed 42 on both sides): 

• F3-Net-mq − SpatialBase at c40 = −0.0040, 95% CI [-0.0151, +0.0068]; at AUC comp 

= −0.0002, [-0.0073, +0.0066]. An independently published frequency architecture, five times SpatialBase’s size, is statistically indistinguishable from the plain backbone once both are trained on compression-diverse data. 

• FreqNet-mq − SpatialBase at c40 = −0.0804, [-0.1084, -0.0543]; at AUC comp = −0.0493, [-0.0671, -0.0330]. Significantly worse on the same data — but not under the same initialization: FreqNet is all-convolutional and trained from scratch, as its published design specifies, while both comparators start from ImageNet weights. On a few hundred FaceForensics++ identities that confound alone could account for a deficit of this size, so this row should not be read as a result about frequency architectures. Two caveats bound how far these rows may be pushed. They are descriptive : no rule was frozen for them, and they do not join the confirmatory family. And they are not augmentation-matched 

— both mq frequency arms were trained with the standard policy while SpatialBase is flip-only, so the comparison is run in the frequency baselines’ favour. The two Xception-mq runs bound that advantage at ≈0.5 pt at c40 (0 .9679 with the standard policy, 0 .9631 flip-only), which does not change either reading. The same rows bear on an objection worth stating plainly: that the frequency stack should have been mounted on the strongest trunk available rather than on CAFRL’s. We did not run that arm , and the reason is resource, not method — it needs a training run on crops that have since been deleted. An Xception-plus-CAFRL-frequency arm against plain Xception-mq would have been as capacity-matched as SpatialBase against Fair-N and would not have touched the STOP-gate, which was adjudicated and closed long before; an earlier version of this paper argued otherwise and the argument was wrong. What the existing rows give instead is family-level corroboration: F3-Net’s FAD branch is a published learned frequency front-end on an Xception trunk, and at matched augmentation on the same multi-CRF data it sits below plain Xception — ∆(F3-Net-mq −

Xception-mq) at c40 = −0.0128, [-0.0236, -0.0029]; at AUC comp = −0.0057, [-0.0124, +0.0007]. That is a statement about one published frequency front-end on the strongest trunk in this study, not about CAFRL’s DCT-plus-phase path on that trunk, and not about full F3-Net. 

The confound and its control. Section 5.2 tells this episode in full, and the two Xception-mq rows of Table 8 are its arithmetic. All headline comparisons are augmentation-matched, flip-only on both sides. 

Real CRF versus synthetic JPEG. Two Xception runs, identical in every respect but the compression diversification of their training data, evaluated on the same real H.264 c40 test set (700 videos). The synthetic arm trains on c23 only and re-encodes each training crop as JPEG at a quality factor drawn uniformly from [30 , 95], decoded back before it reaches the network, so the network sees real JPEG blocking and quantization; the real arm trains on the six H.264 CRF levels. Both use the flip-only base policy, so the JPEG re-encode is the only difference in what the two see. The synthetic arm reaches 0.8898 at real c40 (95% CI [0.8608, 0.9161]; released run p2a xcep jpeg ), the real-CRF arm 0.9631 ([0.9484, 0.9758]; b4b xception mq fliponly ). Those intervals are 

marginal per-arm bootstraps, not a paired contrast: the synthetic arm’s per-video scores were not retained, which is audit defect D8, so the paired bootstrap used for every other contrast in this paper is not computable here. This is the single exception flagged in Section 4; the probe’s own frozen rule 26 declared a gap on non-overlapping intervals or a ≥2 pt difference, and Appendix E adds a deliberately conservative unpaired test. The gap is + 7.3 pt with non-overlapping intervals; Section 8 states what it does and does not license. 

# D Out-of-distribution tables 

Cross-dataset and near-domain. Table 9 reports the out-of-distribution evaluation (train FF++ multi-CRF, test elsewhere; video-AUC). Celeb-DF v2 is the genuinely cross-dataset corpus; DFD is 

near-domain , sharing FF++’s capture and processing lineage; both of its compression levels are the ones its authors distribute. 

Protocol. Celeb-DF v2 uses its own official test list (518 videos: 178 real, 340 synthesized) and DFD its full released set as re-cropped here (3,431 videos: 363 real actors, 3,068 manipulations), both scored at video level as the FF++ cells are and both as distributed — DFD at the c23 and c40 the FaceForensics++ authors publish, Celeb-DF v2 at whatever compression its videos carry, which the corpus does not stratify. One curation asymmetry: FF++ and DFD crops come from the curated multi-person track selection of the Data-availability section, while Celeb-DF v2 was cropped with the plain largest-face-per-frame rule. Its footage is predominantly single-subject, so we expect little difference, but it is one. No CRF variant was generated for either corpus or for FaceShifter; our re-encodes cover the FF++ core sets only. Full protocol: evaluation/OOD-PROTOCOL.md .Read at three seeds, every arm sits inside every other arm’s band on every cell: the fair frequency variants neither gain nor lose out of distribution relative to the plain backbone, and the shipped model does not either. The honest qualification is that these bands are wide . Fair-N’s three Celeb-DF runs are 0.668, 0.571 and 0.703 — a 13-point spread from seed alone, against the 0.4-point spread the same arm shows at FF++ c40. Out of distribution the seed dominates the architecture by more than an order of magnitude, and at the resolution Section 7.4 computes (4–20 pt across seeds) these cells exclude a large effect and nothing finer. They do not settle whether the fair re-tests tie only because FF++ sits near ceiling: a contribution worth less than about ten points would be invisible here. That question is open, not answered. 

Unseen manipulation (FaceShifter, held out; n=280 videos). Shipped recipe, seed-pooled 3v3 (Table 10): the apparent single-seed c23 edge vanished (seed noise), and the c40 lean (+2 .2 pt) never reached significance. Fair variants, 3-seed means: Fair-N c23 0.799 / c40 0.711; Fair-W c23 0.768 / c40 0.707; SpatialBase c23 0.823 / c40 0.732 — seed-pooled, both fair variants sit below the backbone (Fair-N pool − SpatialBase pool at c40 −0.0325, CI [-0.0545, -0.0114]; Fair-W pool − SpatialBase pool −0.0318, CI [-0.0575, -0.0065]), and their single-seed leans were sign-inconsistent (Fair-N s42 +0 .0220, CI [-0.0062, +0.0508]; Fair-W s42 −0.0227, CI [-0.0537, +0.0081], each against the 3-seed SpatialBase pool). In the unfavorable direction the two pooled deficits are significant unadjusted 

given these three seeds per arm , one of them (Fair-N’s) surviving multiplicity adjustment, and neither survives resampling the seeds (Appendix E). The per-seed cells show why: Fair-N reads 0.765 / 0.712 / 0.656 against SpatialBase’s 0.718 / 0.747 / 0.731, so the seed-42 pair favours Fair-N by 4.7 pt and the seed-2 pair disfavours it by 7.5 pt — on this axis the seed carries more than the architecture, in both directions. The axis is a single held-out 2020 face-swap method on FF++ footage, n=280 videos. 27 E Statistical robustness 

The intervals in the main text resample the evaluated video and condition on the three seeds each arm was run at. This appendix varies both assumptions, tests the neutral contrasts as equivalence claims rather than as failures to reject, and adjusts the significant ones for the size of the family they sit in. Everything here is recomputed from the released per-video scores by the analysis scripts shipped with the release repository, under the same recipe as the main text: 10,000 replicates, fixed seed, percentile intervals, seeds pooled by per-video mean. 

The resampling unit. The official test split is 70 identity pairs; each of its 140 identities contributes one real video and four manipulated ones, so the 700 evaluated videos are not 700 independent draws. A manipulated file is named {target } { source } — the footage is the target’s, the driving face the source’s — and every adjudicated contrast was re-run at four cluster definitions, keyed explicitly: 

source identity (the primary unit of Table 11: a real video joins the four manipulations that take their face from it; 140 clusters of five), target identity (a real video joins the four manipulations built on its footage; 140 of five), base video (the four methods of one manipulated video, each real video its own cluster; 280 clusters) and identity pair (70 clusters of ten). These are four distinct partitions but not four independent probes, and the reason is worth stating: on the 560 manipulated videos the first three coincide, differing only in where each real video is placed, which is why their standard errors track each other. Across all four units and all twelve contrasts the standard error moves between 

−21% and +16% ( −4% to +16% at the source-identity unit) — it can fall as well as rise, because resampling identities whole also removes between-identity variation an independent draw injects into a paired difference — and no verdict changes under any of them .

Conditioning on the seeds. The pooled intervals average an arm’s three seeds per video and then resample videos, so they describe the uncertainty that remains once those three runs are fixed. Resampling the seeds as well — three per arm with replacement, drawn independently on each side, then the shared video resample — roughly doubles their width: Fair-N − SpatialBase becomes 

−0.0009, CI [-0.0119, +0.0123], and Fair-W − SpatialBase +0 .0022, CI [-0.0065, +0.0164] (95%, video unit; the clustered variants lie within 0.0005 of these endpoints). Both still include zero. We apply the same estimator to the two contrasts that run against our own hypothesis , which is where it costs us something: the pooled held-out-manipulation deficits of Appendix D, significant at the video unit, become Fair-N −0.0325, CI [-0.0899, +0.0342] and Fair-W −0.0317, [-0.0827, +0.0204] — intervals roughly two to three times wider, both including zero, at all three seed-resampled units (seed+video, seed+source, seed+pair; endpoints within 0.005 of each other). On that axis the per-seed cells are dispersed and sign-inconsistent, so the seed level carries the signal; the deficit is conditional on the three seeds run and is not established unconditionally. With k=3 the seed resample is necessarily coarse — a property of a three-seed design, not of the estimator — and the minimum detectable effect it implies, 1.7 points, is the conservative counterpart of the 1.5 points obtained by treating each seed’s AUC as one observation; we quote the range where the difference matters. 

Equivalence. A neutral verdict is an equivalence claim, and an interval that includes zero does not by itself establish one. We therefore also subject the two pooled headline contrasts to two one-sided tests [35, 36] against an equivalence margin of δ = 1 AUC point, concluding equivalence when the entire 90% interval lies inside ( −δ, +δ). 

Both the margin and these two tests are post hoc and sit outside the confirmatory family. Neither is among the thirteen confirmatory comparisons of Section 4, which are difference tests fixed before the run or evaluation each governs; we report the TOSTs as post-hoc descriptive 

28 characterizations of contrasts whose confirmatory adjudication is the paired difference test already in Table 3. No claim here is licensed by a TOST that the difference test and the resolution floor do not license already. 

The margin is justified on this study’s run-to-run noise, and on nothing else. Re-running SpatialBase at a different seed — same architecture, data and recipe — moves its c40 video-AUC with an across-seed standard deviation of 0 .645 pt ( k=3, from Table 6), and the spread over those three runs is 1 .22 pt. One point is about 1 .5 such SDs: wide enough that a difference inside it cannot be told from re-running the same architecture, and well below the smallest effect this paper calls significant (+3 .66 pt). We do not justify δ by an architectural effect size: the one trunk-width contrast adjudicated here, ∆(SpatialBase − TrunkCtrl pool) = −0.0038, CI [-0.0116, +0.0039], reports no detectable architecture share . An earlier version of this appendix and of the D4 ledger row read “widening the trunk is worth about a point”; nothing measured here supports it and we withdraw it from both. 

The result, and how it reads under adjustment. At the published video unit both contrasts conclude equivalence (Fair-N: 90% CI [-0.0057, +0.0036], pTOST = 0 .001; Fair-W: [-0.0025, +0.0071], 

pTOST = 0 .006), and so they do at all four cluster units (worst case 0 .010); the tightest margins within which they conclude at the video unit are 0 .57 and 0 .71 points. The unadjusted values are the paper’s primary reading, for the reason above — these are re-characterizations of contrasts already inside the family, not two further confirmatory decisions. That is an argument, not a fact, so we print the alternatives rather than leave them to be found: as an equivalence family of their own the threshold is α/ 2 = 0 .025 and both clear it at every unit; folded into the thirteen-member confirmatory family it is α/ 13 = 3 .8 × 10 −3, which Fair-N’s 0 .001 clears and Fair-W’s 0.006 does not , nor its clustered 0.010. Table 3 carries that qualification on the row itself. 

What this excludes, in points. Given these three seeds per arm the pooled result excludes differences beyond ±1 pt at c40 — comfortably excluding the several-point frequency gains this literature advertises at low quality — and does not exclude smaller ones: once the seeds are resampled the Fair-W interval reaches +1 .64 pt, so a gain the size of the fairest published frequency ablation in Table 5 (+0 .014 AUC, i.e. 1 .4 pt) is not ruled out. The verdict is a bound near ±1 pt conditional on these seeds, not a bound near zero. Resampled over seeds the two contrasts do not conclude equivalence at all (Fair-W’s 90% interval reaches +0 .0131, pTOST = 0 .11): three seeds fix the arms compared, not the population they came from. 

Multiplicity. Two-sided p-values are computed from the same bootstrap as a normal approximation 

(p = erfc( |∆|/σ √2) with σ the bootstrap standard deviation), used for ordering and thresholding only: every interval in this paper is a percentile interval precisely so as not to assume a symmetric bootstrap distribution, and the bootstrap’s own achieved significance level saturates at 1 /B for the four flagship rows, which is why it cannot serve here. For those four ( z ≈ 3.7 to 4 .7) nothing turns on the approximation; for the borderline rows — Fair-W’s held-out-manipulation deficit at 1 .2 × 10 −2

and its pTOST of 0 .006 — it is the least trustworthy part of the construction, and we report both as borderline rather than adjudicate on the third digit. That gives the three significant contrasts of Table 3 at p = 2 .0 × 10 −4, 1 .4 × 10 −5 and 5 .5 × 10 −6 at the cluster unit, and the real-CRF-versus-JPEG training gap of Appendix C at p = 3 .3 × 10 −6 (unpaired, from the two marginal intervals, since the JPEG arm’s per-video scores were not retained). Over the largest family we report — thirteen comparisons: the eight of Table 3, the four held-out-manipulation contrasts, and the training-data gap — the Bonferroni threshold is α/ 13 = 3 .8 × 10 −3, and all four survive it, as they do Holm’s step-down procedure. Of the two pooled FaceShifter deficits, Fair-N’s survives ( p = 3 .7 × 10 −3) and Fair-W’s does not ( p = 1 .2 × 10 −2); both point away from the hypothesis under test, and both are conditional on the three seeds each arm was run at — resampled over seeds, neither excludes zero (above). 29 Table 1: Notation — every arm this paper compares, and the crosswalk to the release. Shipped is CAFRL’s as-specified recipe, fair the baseline recipe applied symmetrically (Sections 3, 4); “seeds” counts the runs behind the reported cells (42, 1, 2). Parameter counts are the model as trained here, with the ImageNet 1000-way head replaced by a single logit — hence 4.0 M for EfficientNet-B0 rather than 5.3 M, 20.8 M for Xception rather than 22.9 M — and include every trained parameter, among them the 1.32 M discriminator CAFRL discards at inference (10.65 M deployed). The last column is the only name the artifact repository uses. 

arm architecture params recipe seeds reported in released run id 

SpatialBase EfficientNet-B0; no frequency streams — the capacity-matched control 4.0 M fair 3 Tables 2, 3, 4, 6, 8–11; Fig. 2(a,b) 

b7 effnet b0 mq fliponly ( s1, s2) 

CAFRL as specified 

full CAFRL: block-DCT + FFT-phase streams, conditioned band gate, CMAM fusion, GRL 11.97 M shipped 3 Tables 2, 4, 9, 10; Fig. 2(a) 

a0 , a1 grl s1 , a1 grl s2 

CAFRL −adv CAFRL minus the adversarial branch 10.65 M shipped 1 §5.3, Tables 3, 4; Fig. 2(a) 

a1 none s42 

spatial-residual 

CAFRL’s narrow trunk with logit = spatial + γ·frequency, γ

zero-initialized 10.29 M shipped 1 §5.3, Tables 3, 4; Fig. 2(a) 

cafrl spatres s42 

TrunkCtrl CAFRL’s 320 →256 spatial trunk alone; no frequency 3.68 M fair 3 §7.1, Tables 3, 4, 6; Fig. 2(b) 

trunk recipe s42/ s1/ s2 

Fair-N narrow trunk + the full frequency stack, adversary off 10.65 M fair 3 §7.1, Tables 3, 4, 6, 9, 11; Fig. 2(b) 

f1 none fair s42/ s1/ s2 

Fair-W full 1280-d trunk + frequency as a 

γ-residual, with an auxiliary head loss; keeps the DCT and phase streams, the estimator and its conditioned band gate, and replaces CMAM with the residual 9.63 M fair 3 §7.2, Tables 3, 4, 6, 9, 11; Figs. 2(b), 4 

f2 spatres full s42/ s1/ s2 

Baseline reproductions (Appendix C; “lit” = c23-trained, “mq” = multi-CRF) 

Xception-mq Xception; no frequency streams; standard augmentation 20.8 M fair 1 Tables 2, 8, 9 b4 xception mq 

Xception-mq ,flip the same, flip-only — the augmentation-matched control and the real-CRF arm of the training-data contrast 20.8 M fair 1 Table 8, App. C 

b4b xception mq fliponly 

F3-Net-mq F3-Net (learnable frequency-band front end on an Xception trunk; FAD branch only, see App. C) 21.0 M fair 1 Table 8, App. C 

b5 f3net mq 

FreqNet-mq FreqNet (high-frequency filtering + frequency-domain convolutions; the only arm trained from scratch, no ImageNet initialization; 5.1 M at this paper’s 256 ×256 5.1 M fair 1 Table 8, App. C 

b6 freqnet mq 

30 Table 2: The STOP-gate comparison (video-AUC, FF++ test). Every row is a single run at seed 42 — the arms exactly as the pre-registered gate adjudicated them. model params c23 c40 AUC comp 

SpatialBase 4.0 M .9867 .9590 .9709 

CAFRL as specified 11.97 M .9738 .9224 .9477 Xception-mq 20.8 M .9872 .9679 .9765 Table 3: The adjudicated contrasts at c40 (10,000-replicate paired video bootstrap, 700 videos). All eight rows are confirmatory, at the grade of provenance the rule column names (Section 4). “s42” is that arm’s frozen seed-42 run; “pool” averages an arm’s per-video scores over its three seeds before the bootstrap, so pooled intervals are conditional on those seeds. “No detectable difference” is bounded by this design’s resolution (Section 4). The last two rows are deliberately asymmetric, as the trunk-recipe control’s pre-specified rule required; pooling SpatialBase’s seeds there moves the architecture-share estimate to about +0 .002 and changes no verdict. Appendix E re-runs every row with the seeds resampled and at four cluster-level units.                                    

> contrast @ c40 ∆ 95% CI rule verdict SpatialBase −CAFRL as specified (s42) +0 .0366 [+0.020, +0.054] pre-registered significant — the gate fires Fair-N −CAFRL −adv (s42) +0 .0396 [+0.0231, +0.0570] pre-specified significant — the deficit was recipe Fair-N −SpatialBase (s42) −0.0004 [-0.0092, +0.0080] pre-specified no detectable difference Fair-W −SpatialBase (s42) +0 .0056 [-0.0022, +0.0134] pre-specified no detectable difference (lean, P=0 .93)
> Fair-N pool −SpatialBase pool (3v3)
> −0.0010 [-0.0066, +0.0045] pre-specified
> no detectable difference; equivalent within ±1pt Fair-W pool −SpatialBase pool (3v3)
> +0.0022 [-0.0035, +0.0080] pre-specified
> no detectable difference; equivalent within ±1pt
> unadjusted (does not survive adjustment over the confirmatory family; App. E) SpatialBase (s42) −TrunkCtrl pool
> −0.0038 [-0.0116, +0.0039] pre-specified architecture share: none detected TrunkCtrl pool −
> spatial-residual (s42) +0 .0490 [+0.0294, +0.0705] pre-specified recipe share: significant

31 5 10 15 20 25 30 0.000 0.025 0.050 0.075 0.100 0.125 0.150 

> Residual gate  |γ|
> selected ckpt (s42, ep 5)

(a) The γ deadlock, broken      

> shipped recipe Fair-W (3 seeds) 510 15 20 25 30

Epoch 

> 0.5 0.6 0.7 0.8 0.9 1.0
> Standalone freq-head AUC (val) 3-seed mean, min–max band
> chance

(b) …yet the signal is real (redundancy) 

> freq head @ c23 freq head @ c40

Figure 4: The redundancy mechanism (Fair-W; all three seeds, seed 42 in the foreground). (a) The 

γ deadlock is broken: the residual weight grows to 0.146 by epoch 6 and decays to 0.031 by epoch 30, against the shipped-recipe probe (dashed), which falls from 0.135 to 0.003 across the curriculum shock at epochs 11–12. The vertical line is the selected checkpoint (seed 42, epoch 5, γ = 0 .140; seeds 1 and 2 select 6 and 7). (b) The standalone frequency head (3-seed mean; band = per-epoch min–max) plateaus at 0.91–0.98 validation AUC over the second half of training, from 0.71/0.81 (c40/c23) at epoch 1 and 0.85/0.97 at the selected checkpoint: its output is discriminative, including at c40, yet adds nothing over the trunk. What it exploits was not isolated to frequency — no matched pixel-domain control was trained. 32 Table 4: CRF sweep, all key arms (video-AUC, FF++ test). Every row is a single run at seed 42 except TrunkCtrl, which is the mean of its three seeds. Fig. 2(a) plots the SpatialBase row and the three shipped-recipe rows as printed here; Fig. 2(b) plots SpatialBase, Fair-N, Fair-W and TrunkCtrl as 3-seed means, so its curves sit slightly off the seed-42 rows below (per-seed values in Appendix A). “fair” = the plain baseline recipe (flat curriculum, uniform lr 2 ×10 −4, flip-only, 30 epochs, zero invariance losses); “shipped” = CAFRL’s as-specified recipe. c18 is an eval-only level (never trained on).                                                                    

> run (recipe) c0 c18 c23 c28 c32 c36 c40 AUC comp
> SpatialBase (fair, s42) .9919 .9892 .9867 .9810 .9758 .9678 .9590 .9709 Fair-W (fair, s42) .9929 .9902 .9894 .9821 .9774 .9719 .9645 .9740 Fair-N (fair, s42) .9941 .9901 .9881 .9798 .9770 .9702 .9586 .9714 TrunkCtrl (fair, 3-seed mean) .9920 .9886 .9863 .9796 .9719 .9644 .9536 .9674 CAFRL as specified (shipped, s42) .9843 .9791 .9738 .9659 .9572 .9451 .9224 .9477 CAFRL −adv (shipped, s42) .9923 .9818 .9697 .9590 .9484 .9311 .9190 .9394 spatial-residual (shipped, s42, γ→0) .9714 .9702 .9686 .9583 .9495 .9307 .9139 .9381

33 Table 5: Control audit of the published positives. “Data-matched” asks whether the baseline each work compares against — named in the same cell — saw the same compression-diverse training data as the proposed method; “capacity-matched” whether it had comparable size. Read from each work’s own experimental section, with the table or section each reading comes from named in the cell. Ma et al. is a JPEG artifact reduction method (PSNR/SSIM, not detection) and is included because its mechanism is the compression-sensitivity decoupling this literature borrows; it is also the only one of the six that runs the control this paper argues for, and the only one that reports parameter counts at all. DANet-ATP [17], cited in Section 2 as the closest mechanism twin, is an 

audio detector (ASVspoof, EER, codec classes) and shares no benchmark, metric or modality with a video face-forgery control audit, so it is out of scope here. 

work data-matched? (and against which baseline) capacity-matched? plain backbone on the same diverse data? Cao et al. [4] no — against a single Xception trained at one compression level while the method trains on paired c23/c40 (Tab. 3, whose train/test compression columns show it) no at training (two branches + a discriminator; only the LQ branch runs at test, 

§3.1); no counts reported 

never run (Tab. 3 rows 1–4 are all single-level) Ma et al. [5] yes against the single-model competitors FBCNN and QGAC (Tab. I column groups; §IV-A-1 matches the JPEG encoder) 

no — 109.9 M vs FBCNN’s 71.9 M (Tab. III) 

yes — Tab. V’s “Baseline” column (base encoder + guided decoder only), same quality-factor pool PLADA [6] asserted for all nine ( §4.1) — but Tabs. 1 and 3 mark six of the nine †, i.e. taken from prior work rather than retrained no — “more optimization parameters than Ojha” (§4.2); no counts reported partly — Fig. 7(a)’s ablation origin is a retrained CLIP linear probe, not a plain-trunk control F3-Net [10] yes within each quality level, against Xception (+ ELA, + PAFilters) (Tab. 1); 

no multi-quality training exists —

§4.1 describes one level per run no — two Xception branches + cross-attention, no counts reported; fair only in the FAD-internal ablation (Tab. 3), where the gain falls to +0 .014 AUC not applicable — no diverse-data regime SPSL [11] yes within each quality level, against a reproduced Xception and ResNet-34/50 (Tab. 2, §4.2.1; Tab. 7); no multi-quality training exists 

yes by construction —only Xception blocks 1–3 and 12 are retained (§4.1); no counts reported not applicable — no diverse-data regime Luo et al. [13] yes but at one fixed quality — FF++ HQ throughout ( §5.1), against an author-trained Xception and Face X-ray (Tabs. 4–5); no compression-diverse training exists no — two Xception streams + attention fusion vs one Xception; no counts reported 

never run on diverse data — the plain-Xception row exists (Tab. 3) but only at fixed HQ 

34 Table 6: Per-seed c40 video-AUC and 3-seed bands ( n=3 seeds per arm — 42, 1, 2; band = 4 .30 s/ √3, the 95% t-band for k=3). Descriptively, both fair CAFRL variants varied less across seeds than the plain backbone; with three seeds per arm that difference is not tested. Fair-W’s +0 .54 pt seed-mean lean is smaller than this design’s resolution and its pooled contrast includes zero. TrunkCtrl — CAFRL’s narrow trunk alone at the fair recipe — is listed for the architecture-share decomposition of Section 7.1, which uses its 3-seed pool.                           

> arm c40 per-seed (s42 / s1 / s2) c40 seed-mean ±band AUC comp seed-mean SpatialBase .9590 / .9614 / .9492 .9565 ±.0160 .9688 Fair-N .9586 / .9567 / .9536 .9563 ±.0062 .9675 Fair-W .9645 / .9602 / .9609 .9619 ±.0058 .9719 TrunkCtrl .9491 / .9566 / .9551 .9536 ±.0098 .9674

35 Table 7: The D1–D8 audit ledger. “Repaired/resolved by” names the pre-specified re-test (or documentation fix) that closed each defect. 

defect why it mattered repaired/resolved by 

D1 — the L1 consistency loss ran 40–120 × the classification loss at the curriculum’s compressed-phase onset, in every arm (including CAFRL −adv) no arm ever trained its frequency features free of invariance pressure; the inference “not the GRL ⇒

frequency itself” was void Fair-N (zero invariance losses, flat curriculum). Confirmed as principal cause : +3 .96 pt recovered at c40 (Fair-N vs. CAFRL −adv, seed 42), significant 

D2 — γ → 0 in the residual probe was a curriculum-shock collapse locked in by a structural deadlock: at γ=0 the frequency path receives zero label gradient the probe could not detect a useful frequency signal even if present; “the model freely discards frequency” was unfounded Fair-W (auxiliary BCE gives the frequency path label gradient regardless of γ). Deadlock broken : γ grows to 0.146, decaying to 0.031 by epoch 30 rather than collapsing 

D3 — optimization never matched: baseline full fine-tune at 2 ×10 −4

from epoch 1 vs CAFRL’s 20 × lower backbone LR, 10-epoch freeze, heavy data deferred to the LR tail part of the deficit was recipe, not architecture TrunkCtrl + Fair-N. Confirmed :the 0.0451 trunk gap splits 

≈88%/ ≈12% recipe/architecture as a point estimate (Section 7.1), and only the recipe share’s interval excludes zero; the fair recipe erases the model-level deficit 

D4 — CAFRL’s spatial path taps an intermediate 320-channel map (256-d projection), discarding the backbone’s final 1280-d representation every CAFRL-with-frequency variant carried a handicapped spatial trunk TrunkCtrl + Fair-W. Closed — no detectable width penalty :the adjudicated width contrast is 

−0.0038, CI [-0.0116, +0.0039] (Table 3), and the frequency path on the full trunk still makes no detectable difference 

D5 — split-BatchNorm evaluation forces the clean branch at eval (train/eval routing mismatch) could have distorted compressed-level evaluation eval-only routing probe. Retired — immaterial : oracle-routing c40 ∆ ≤ 0 on both probed arms (the clean eval mildly flattered 

CAFRL) 

D6 — the GRL silently degraded its own conditioning estimator: ±1-bin accuracy 0 .88 → ≈ 0.4 under the adversary (healthy ≈1.0 without it) the “compression-aware conditioning” mechanism was self-defeating as configured (“condition-then-remove”) four-way control pattern across arms; estimator-health warning (±1-bin < 0.7) added to the training diagnostics 

D7 — “discriminator at chance = invariance working” was a misread: the discriminator had collapsed to a constant predictor invariance-vs-dead-adversary is indeterminate from that run documentation corrected; diagnostic readout fixed 

D8 — artifact hygiene: four cells lacked per-video prediction files; a seed-band constant hardcoded for 

k=3; an argument-order bug in the run aggregator reproducibility of the reported cells per-video predictions backfilled from frozen checkpoints (bit-exact); t-quantile generalized (k=3 unchanged); aggregator fixed with tests; all evaluation drivers committed 

36 Table 8: Harmonized baseline benchmark (video-AUC, FF++ official test split, 700 videos per level, single runs at seed 42) — the object behind contribution C4. “lit” = the literature protocol (c23-trained), “mq” = multi-CRF training; “aug” is std , the standard policy described above, or 

flip , horizontal flip only. Parameter counts follow Table 1’s convention. All rows are descriptive and none enters the confirmatory family. c0 and c18 are omitted for space (every row is at or near ceiling there); the complete seven-level sweep with per-cell marginal intervals is released as 

evaluation/BENCHMARK.md .                                                       

> model prot. aug params c23 c28 c32 c36 c40 AUC comp
> Xception lit std 20.8 M .9944 .9890 .9778 .9280 .8660 .9402 F3-Net lit std 21.0 M .9917 .9835 .9654 .9210 .8599 .9325 FreqNet lit std 5.1 M .9877 .9652 .9274 .8541 .7684 .8788 Xception-mq mq std 20.8 M .9872 .9838 .9803 .9739 .9679 .9765 Xception-mq mq flip 20.8 M .9869 .9820 .9772 .9691 .9631 .9728 F3-Net-mq mq std 21.0 M .9885 .9831 .9766 .9683 .9551 .9708 FreqNet-mq mq std 5.1 M .9693 .9566 .9383 .9131 .8787 .9217
> SpatialBase mq flip 4.0 M .9867 .9810 .9758 .9678 .9590 .9709

Table 9: Out-of-distribution evaluation (video-AUC; n=518 Celeb-DF v2, n=3 ,431 DFD). Upper block: 3-seed mean ± the 95% t-band (4 .30 s/ √3, k=3). Lower block: Xception-mq, one seed. Per-cell marginal intervals (widths 0.02–0.05) and the seed-42 values are in the released summaries and claims map. These cells were stored as summary statistics without per-video scores, so no paired contrast is computable for any of them : unlike every FF++ contrast here they cannot be adjudicated, and are reported descriptively. TrunkCtrl was not evaluated out of distribution. 

model Celeb-DF v2 DFD-c23 DFD-c40 

3-seed mean ± 95% t-band ( k=3 )

CAFRL as specified 0.705 ± 0.051 0.819 ± 0.040 0.635 ± 0.035 SpatialBase 0.686 ± 0.035 0.825 ± 0.054 0.650 ± 0.031 Fair-N 0.647 ± 0.170 0.792 ± 0.095 0.659 ± 0.073 Fair-W 0.681 ± 0.048 0.835 ± 0.057 0.664 ± 0.054 

single run, seed 42 — not replicated 

Xception-mq 0.702 0.881 0.688 

Table 10: FaceShifter (held out), shipped recipe, seed-pooled (3 seeds each arm; 10k paired video bootstrap). 

level CAFRL as spec. SpatialBase paired ∆ 95% CI P (∆ >0) c23 0.822 0.823 −0.008 [-0.041, +0.025] 0.30 c40 0.758 0.732 +0 .022 [-0.021, +0.064] 0.84 

37 Table 11: The contrasts whose clustered interval the text relies on, at two resampling units: the published one (each evaluated video an independent draw) and the source-identity cluster (140 clusters of five for FF++, 140 of two for FaceShifter, resampled whole). 10,000 paired replicates, percentile intervals, identical seeds. All twelve adjudicated contrasts were run at all five units — the video plus the four cluster definitions defined above — and behave the same way; every endpoint is in the released evaluation/analysis/ output. The target-identity and identity-pair definitions give intervals inside the span of the two shown; on the FaceShifter set the base-video definition degenerates to the video unit (280 singleton clusters), so it is not an independent unit there. No verdict changes under any of them.                                       

> contrast @ c40 ∆95% CI (video) 95% CI (identity clusters) SpatialBase −CAFRL as specified (s42) +0 .0366 [+0.0205, +0.0538] [+0.0182, +0.0569] Fair-N −CAFRL −adv (s42) +0 .0396 [+0.0231, +0.0570] [+0.0222, +0.0580] Fair-N pool −SpatialBase pool (3v3) −0.0010 [-0.0066, +0.0045] [-0.0064, +0.0046] Fair-W pool −SpatialBase pool (3v3) +0 .0022 [-0.0035, +0.0080] [-0.0042, +0.0085] TrunkCtrl pool −spatial-residual (s42) +0 .0490 [+0.0294, +0.0705] [+0.0296, +0.0715]
> FaceShifter, held out ( n=280 )
> Fair-N pool −SpatialBase pool −0.0325 [-0.0545, -0.0114] [-0.0546, -0.0109] Fair-W pool −SpatialBase pool −0.0318 [-0.0575, -0.0065] [-0.0563, -0.0070]

38