Title: An Improved Generative Adversarial Network for Micro-Resistivity Imaging Logging Restoration

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2606.10200v1

Published Time: Wed, 10 Jun 2026 00:17:52 GMT

Number of Pages: 7

Markdown Content:
# An Improved Generative Adversarial Network for Micro-Resistivity Imaging Logging Restoration 

1st Ahmed Faizul Haque Dhrubo * 2nd S.M. Riaz Rahman Antu 3rd Saif Ahmed 

Dept. of ECE Dept. of ECE Dept. of ECE North South University North South University North South University 

Dhaka, Bangladesh Dhaka, Bangladesh Dhaka, Bangladesh ahmed.dhrubo@northsouth.edu riaz.antu@northsouth.edu saif.ahmed03@northsouth.edu 4th Asadullah Hil Galib 5th Souvik Pramanik 6th Mohammad Ashrafuzzaman Khan 

Dept. of ECE Dept. of ECE Dept. of ECE North South University North South University North South University 

Dhaka, Bangladesh Dhaka, Bangladesh Dhaka, Bangladesh asadullah.galib01@northsouth.edu souvik.pramanik@northsouth.edu mohammad.khan02@northsouth.edu 7th Mohammad Abdul Qayum 8th Mohsin Sajjad 

Dept. of ECE Dept. of ECE North South University North South University 

Dhaka, Bangladesh Dhaka, Bangladesh mohammad.qayum@northsouth.edu mohsin.sajjad@northsouth.edu 

Abstract —An improved GAN-based imaging logging image restoration method is presented in this paper for solving the problem of partially missing micro-resistivity imaging logging images. The method uses FCN as the generative network in-frastructure and adds a depth-separable convolutional residual block to learn and retain more effective pixel and semantic information; an Inception module is added to increase the multi-scale perceptual field of the network and reduce the number of parameters in the network; and a multi-scale feature extraction module and a spatial attention residual block are added to combine the channel attention. The multi-scale module adds a multi-scale feature extraction module and a spatial attention residual block, which combine the channel attention mechanism and the residual block to achieve multi-scale feature extraction. The global discriminative network and the local discriminative network are designed to gradually improve the content and semantic structure coherence between the restored parts and the whole image by playing off each other and the generative network. According to the experimental results, the average structural similarity measure of the five sets of imaged logging images with different sizes of missing regions in the test set is 

0.903 , which is an improvement of about 0.3 compared with other similar methods. It is shown that the method in this study can be used for the restoration of micro-resistivity imaging log images with good improvement in semantic structural coherence and texture details, thus providing a new deep learning method to ensure the smooth advancement of the subsequent interpretation of micro-resistivity imaging log images. 

Index Terms —Generative Adversarial Networks (GANs), Micro-Resistivity Imaging Logging, Image Restoration, Deep Learning 

I. I NTRODUCTION 

A. Background & Motivation 

The accurate identification of the geology of oil and gas reservoirs that consist of carbonate, volcanic, and metamorphic rocks becomes increasingly crucial during resource exploration and production. The rock formations may be characterized by heterogeneity, fracture, and complex structure; hence, it becomes hard to analyze the internal properties of such geo-logical formations through traditional logging methods. Micro-resistivity imaging logging is an advanced imaging technique capable of generating high-resolution images of the inter-nal structures, such as fractures, sedimentary structures, and boundaries between different lithologies. Nevertheless, various real-world issues such as tool instabilities, well collapse, and failures result in poor quality images with noise, distortion, and incomplete image information. Exemplar-based and CNN-based image restoration ap-proaches are unable to handle domain-specific high-frequency image data. As a consequence, researchers resorted to adopting deep learning models, in particular, Generative Adversarial Networks (GANs). These models help in restoring lost or noisy parts in an image based on the learned image distribution for generating plausible images. Although GAN-based approaches have been proposed for restoring imaging logging data, there remain significant deficiencies in dealing with large missing regions and complex geological semantics of imaging logging data. The GANs are a means by which one can generate images that have realistic textures and structures based on the 

> arXiv:2606.10200v1 [cs.CV] 8 Jun 2026

image distribution. The existing techniques, however, fail to generate realistic textures when there is a large area of missing information. 

B. Objectives 

The main goal of this study is to create a sophisticated GAN-based image restoration system that could restore the images of logging in micro-resistivity imaging logging images. This system is intended to:  

> •

Perform restoration of missing/damaged sections in the logging image with precision.  

> •

Ensure the efficient reconstruction of complicated geo-logical formations.  

> •

Preserve structural and semantic coherence of recon-structed images.  

> •

Overcome the drawbacks of previous approaches in terms of restoring larger sections and reconstructing geological formations. 

C. Contributions 

To meet these goals, the following novel GAN architecture equipped with several cutting-edge components is proposed in this study:  

> •

Depthwise Separable Convolutional Residual Block 

for increasing feature extraction efficiency by lowering computational cost.  

> •

Inception Module for identifying multi-scale geological features and structures.  

> •

Channel Attention Mechanism for highlighting signifi-cant feature channels.  

> •

Dual Discriminator to assess image coherence and local textures. The suggested approach will provide better structural con-sistency and visual realism of the reconstructed images. As a result, this will help enhance the image quality of micro-resistivity imaging logging measurements and enable further processes of geological analysis, such as fault detection, lithological identification, and formation estimation. In other words, it is possible to say that the suggested technique can contribute to better reservoir characterization and oil/gas industry decision-making. 

D. Organization of the Paper 

The rest of the paper will be organized in the following way. The Section II will present the relevant literature and theoretical foundations of image restoration, Generative Ad-versarial Networks (GANs), attention techniques, and image quality assessment metrics; it will also provide an overview of recent developments in image inpainting using deep learning techniques. Section III will discuss the methodology used in this study, which includes an overview of the GAN-based image restoration approach, its overall structure, as well as a detailed description of its components, namely the generator, the dual-branch discriminator, and the attention techniques in-corporated into it. Section IV will analyze the quantitative and qualitative results obtained in this research, comparing them to other advanced approaches to image restoration. Section V will highlight the limitations of this study and propose directions for future research. Finally, Section VI concludes the paper by summarizing the major findings and contributions of this work. II. L ITERATURE REVIEW 

A. GAN-Based Image Restoration 

Generative Adversarial Networks (GANs) have been found to be one of the most successful deep learning models for image restoration and image inpainting operations. In this regard, P. Rama et al. [1] have presented IR-GAN that makes use of generative facial priors for restoring damaged and low-quality photos. The model effectively fills the missing parts of images by understanding the complex distributions of images and restores the images while keeping them authentic. Likewise, Tarang and Poonkuntran [2] used a GAN-based image inpainting technique for restoring the damaged images of Mysore Palace. They made use of mask generation and adversarial learning to fill the missing parts of the images and showcased the effectiveness of GANs in preserving the struc-ture of historical images. Mishra et al. [3] developed a GAN-based model along with attention and auxiliary classifiers that used perceptual loss and attention-based techniques for better image synthesis. 

B. Borehole and Imaging Logging Image Restoration 

Borehole and image logging are areas where image restora-tion has been the focus of significant research owing to problems such as missing data and distorted images. In their work, Wang et al. [4] presented an enhanced system for image restoration in boreholes using histogram equalization and the DeepFill GAN model. In another work, Liu et al. [5] developed an image inpainting algorithm using the Generative Adversar-ial Network (GAN). This algorithm utilized a U-Net Encoder-decoder network architecture and pixel-wise discriminators to restore missing pad images. Tests conducted on the algorithm showed that it had a restoration accuracy greater than 89%. 

C. Attention Mechanisms and Multi-Scale Feature Learning 

The use of attention modules and multi-scale feature ex-traction was prevalent in achieving improved performance in image restoration problems. The work done by Shang et al. [6] presented an approach for mural restoration which uti-lized a combination of Group-wise Multi-scale Self-Attention (GMSA), Encoder-Decoder Feature Interaction (EDFI), and Local Feature Enhancement Blocks (LFEB). This combination allowed the network to effectively learn both local features along with global structures, thus improving its restoration ability. In another work, Mishra et al. [3] showed the efficacy of attention modules in image generation and image restoration using GANs. Focusing on prominent areas within an image helps enhance the feature representation and improves image generation/restoration. D. Transformer-Based Image Reconstruction 

Modern developments in the area of image restoration have employed Transformer models to exploit the benefits of long-term dependence as well as global context. Shang et al. [6] used transformer elements along with a GAN structure based on U-net for image restoration in murals. In the same way, Du and Tian [7] introduced the concept of Transformer-based GAN (T-GAN). T-GAN utilized the properties of transformers along with an adversarial network and successfully captured global information from images, producing higher-quality results as compared to traditional GAN-based models. 

E. Medical Image Restoration and Reconstruction 

The use of deep learning models has produced some great results in the application of image restoration in medical imag-ing technology. Du and Tian [7] introduced a Transformer-GAN framework for the purpose of restoring images from MRI scans. Their model had performed better in PSNR and SSIM metrics by ensuring that critical anatomical structures were not affected. The Cascaded Data Consistency Generative Adversarial Network (CDCGAN) is an approach used by An et al. [8] in the reconstruction of PET images. The removal of noise and artifact in the reconstructed PET images was possible by incorporating a data consistency layer in the architecture of the generator network. LUD-VAE is a deep generative variational inference model introduced by Zheng et al. [9] capable of learning joint distributions of probability from unpaired datasets. The method gave impressive results in the area of image denoising, super resolution, and low-light image restoration. Also, Sun and Osama [10] have come up with the Posterior-Mean Denoising Diffusion Model (PMDM-PET). 

F. Research Gap 

Despite the proven success of GANs, attention mechanisms, Transformer networks, and deep generative models in restoring and reconstructing images, some challenges still persist when applying these techniques to the problem of micro-resistivity imaging logging data. Most existing models are trained to deal with natural images or medical imaging problems and might not be well-suited for processing micro-resistivity im-ages, which require consideration of the underlying geological structure, fractured nature of the image, and high-frequency details. Also, many existing methods that use GAN-based models to perform image restoration do not account for large missing image regions or fail to reconstruct consistent texture. In order to mitigate the above-stated drawbacks, this study introduces a more sophisticated GAN-based image restoration method that is designed especially for the task of micro-resistivity imaging logging images. The proposed model in-volves several novel techniques such as depthwise separable convolutional residual blocks, Inception models, multi-scale features, channel attention, and dual global/local discrimina-tors. III. M ETHODOLOGY 

A. Overview of the Proposed Framework 

For handling the problems associated with repairing par-tially damaged micro-resistivity imaging logging image data, an improved Generative Adversarial Network (GAN) model is used. This model comprises a generator and dual-branch discriminator. The generator acts as the model that generates missing image data, whereas the discriminator determines the realistic and structural consistency of the generated images by conducting both global and local assessments. The generator makes use of Depthwise Separable Convolu-tional Residual Blocks (DSCR), Inception blocks, as well as multiresolution feature extraction along with Channel Atten-tion Residual Blocks (CAR). The architecture of the improved GAN framework used is depicted in Figure 1. 

B. Generator Network 1) Generation Module: Fully Convolutional Network (FCN) is used as the basic model of the generator because of its excellent ability in performing dense predictions in images. In order to enhance efficiency and reduce computational costs, depthwise separable convolution operations are applied together with residual operations, batch normalization, and Leaky ReLU activation layers to create a new module named Depthwise Separable Convolutional Residual (DSCR). This new layer will help the network to capture spatial and channel-wise dependencies, as well as maintaining semantic and boundary information needed in image recovery tasks. The structure of the DSCR layer is illustrated in Figure 2. An Inception module is used in the generator in order to increase the receptive field and prevent overfitting. Parallel kernels of different sizes 1 × 1, 3 × 3, and 5 × 5 are used for convolution, and dimensionality reduction using 1 × 1

convolutions is carried out. This results in feature extraction from images at various levels. The architecture of the Inception module is shown in Fig. 3. 

2) Multi-Scale Feature Extraction Module: In order to improve the fidelity of representation of geological features at various scales, a multi-scale feature extraction component has been embedded within the generator model. This model is composed of two branches: medium-resolution and low-resolution, which respectively extract medium-frequency and low-frequency features. The first step is to apply a Feature Extraction Module (FEM) to extract basic-level features from an image using convolution layers. Next, a CAR component can be applied to highlight important channels and downplay unnecessary fea-tures. Furthermore, residual connections are used to overcome information loss during the upsampling process. The architectures of the FEM and CAR modules are illus-trated in Figure 4. Bilinear interpolation is employed between convolutional stages to progressively restore spatial resolution and improve image reconstruction quality. Fig. 1: Overall architecture of the proposed GAN-based image restoration framework. 

Fig. 2: Architecture of the Depthwise Separable Convolutional Residual (DSCR) block. 

C. Dual-Branch Discriminator Network 

Although the generation process is capable of recreating the missing part of the image, maintaining consistency in terms of structure and realness continues to pose a challenge. Hence, two-stream discrimination framework is employed using a global discriminator and a local discriminator. The global discriminator checks for consistency in the reconstructed image, while the local discriminator checks for the repaired parts of the image along with their respective boundaries. This process improves upon each other through adversarial learning, producing better results in terms of real-ness and continuity in texture and semantics. The architecture of the discriminator network is shown in Figure 5. 

Fig. 3: Structure of the Inception module. 

D. Training Strategy 

The training process for this model involves the use of adversarial optimization. First, defective images from imaging logging and their respective masks are used as inputs to the generator in order to generate restored images. Generator training involves content loss, perceptual loss, style loss, and adversarial loss. Then, the two discriminators are trained to distinguish between the restored and real images. Finally, both components of GAN are jointly trained using the objective function. 

E. Loss Function 

The proposed network is optimized using a hybrid objective function that combines content, perceptual, style, and adversar-ial losses. This composite loss enables the model to preserve Fig. 4: Architectures of the Feature Extraction Module (FEM) and Channel Attention Residual (CAR) block. 

Fig. 5: Architecture of the dual-branch discriminator network. pixel-level fidelity, maintain semantic consistency, recover texture details, and generate visually realistic restorations. The content loss consists of valid-region and hole-region reconstruction losses, formulated as 

Lv = (1 − α) |Min ⊙ (Ig − It)|1 + α (1 − MS-SSIM ) (1) 

Lh = (1 − α) |(1 − Min ) ⊙ (Ig − It)|1 + α (1 − MS-SSIM )

(2) where Ig and It denote the generated image and the ground-truth image, respectively, Min represents the binary mask, 

⊙ denotes element-wise multiplication, and α is empirically set to 0.5. Here, MS-SSIM denotes the Multi-Scale Structural Similarity Index Measure. To encourage semantic consistency between restored and reference images, perceptual loss is computed using feature maps extracted from a pre-trained VGG16 network: 

Lperc = 1

N

> N

X

> i=1

|Fi(It) − Fi(Ig )|2 (3) where Fi(·) represents the feature map extracted from the 

i-th layer and N denotes the total number of selected layers. To preserve texture and style information, a style loss based on Gram matrix representations is adopted: 

Algorithm 1 Training Procedure of the Proposed GAN Model  

> 1:

Initialize training epochs e, dataset size n, and batch size 

b 

> 2:

for i = 1 to e do  

> 3:

for j = 1 to n/b do  

> 4:

Input a batch of defective images and masks  

> 5:

Generate restored images using the generator  

> 6:

Compute content, perceptual, and style losses  

> 7:

Update generator parameters  

> 8:

Input restored and real images into discriminators  

> 9:

Compute adversarial loss  

> 10:

Update global and local discriminator parameters  

> 11:

Jointly optimize the complete GAN model  

> 12:

end for  

> 13:

end for 

Ls = 1

N

> N

X

> i=1

1

C2

> i

Fi(It)Fi(It)T − Fi(Ig )Fi(Ig )T 2 (4) where Ci denotes the number of channels in the correspond-ing feature map. The adversarial loss is computed from both global and local discriminators to ensure structural coherence at different spatial scales: 

Ladv = 12 (0 .7Lglobal + 0 .3Llocal ) , (5) where 

Lglobal = min  

> G

max 

> D



EIt [log Dg (It)] + EIg [1 − log Dg (G(Iin , M in ))] 

 (6) and 

Llocal = min  

> G

max 

> D



EIt [log Dl(It ⊙ Min )] + EIg [1 − log Dl(G(Iin , M in ) ⊙ Min )] 



(7) The overall training objective is defined as 

L = λ1Lv + λ2Lh + λ3Lperc + λ4Ls + λ5Ladv , (8) where λ1, λ2, λ3, λ4, and λ5 are weighting coefficients controlling the relative contribution of each loss component. In this study, these coefficients are empirically set to 1.0, 3.0, 0.02, 120, and 0.1, respectively. (a) SSIM 

> (b) PSNR
> (c) Loss

Fig. 6: Training and validation curves of SSIM, PSNR, and loss function values. IV. R ESULTS ANALYSIS AND DISCUSSION 

A GAN-driven image restoration architecture was developed and its performance tested by applying it to the actual micro-resistivity imaging logging data obtained from the Daqing and Dagang oil fields. Two standard image restoration measures, such as Structural Similarity Index Measure (SSIM) and Peak Signal-to-Noise Ratio (PSNR), were applied for performance evaluation. The progress of SSIM, PSNR, and training loss is shown in Fig. 6. Both training and validation curves converged well and demonstrated no overfitting; thus, the model was able to learn the main image properties efficiently. The highest SSIM scores observed for the training and validation datasets were 0.964 and 0.972, correspondingly, while the largest PSNRs obtained were 37.684 dB and 37.436 dB. Moreover, the training loss decreased with each epoch and stabilized by the 20th epoch. In order to examine the efficacy of the suggested frame-work, qualitative and quantitative analyses were performed in comparison with three selected image restoration techniques based on GANs. The results of restoration obtained using these three techniques are presented visually in Fig. 7. 

Fig. 7: Qualitative comparison of image restoration results generated by different methods. The experimental results show that the proposed method provides better restoration performance, especially for the parts of the image with complex geological structure and lack of boundary information. When comparing to GLCIC, the proposed method is found to provide better texture clarity and better structural information. Although WGAN stabilizes training by using Wasserstein distance, it produces blurry boundary edges and weak texture recovery of images. In PDGAN, spatial probability normalization enhances diversity; nevertheless, artifacts sometimes occur near missing boundary edges due to focusing too much on local information. The better performance of the proposed framework could be credited to various architectural changes that have been made in the model. First, the usage of depthwise separable convolutional residual blocks leads to better efficiency in feature extraction and maintaining semantics. Second, the usage of an Inception module allows for effective multi-scale feature learning, where different geological structures at different scales can be captured by the model. Third, the use of channel attention residual blocks boosts the ability to represent significant features and reduce irrelevant responses. According to experimental studies, it has been observed that the suggested approach yields an average SSIM value of 0.903 under various missing region situations, showing a marked improvement over traditional restoration techniques. It can be concluded from this study that the suggested technique is well-equipped with the capability of reconstructing missing regions without losing geological information and structure. V. L IMITATIONS AND FUTURE WORK 

A. Limitations 

Although the proposed framework demonstrates robust per-formance in restoring missing micro-resistivity imaging log-ging data, several constraints remain to be addressed:  

> •

Dataset Heterogeneity and Generalization: The model was primarily developed and validated using logging samples obtained from only two specific geographical regions, namely the Daqing and Dagang oil fields. Conse-quently, its adaptability and generalizability across highly diverse geological formations and varying borehole envi-ronment conditions warrant further empirical verification.  

> •

Computational Overhead: The integration of advanced architectural components, including multi-scale feature extraction modules and sophisticated spatial attention mechanisms, inherently increases the computational com-plexity and memory footprint during the model training and inference phases.  

> •

Comparative Scope: This investigation focuses strictly on benchmarking against alternative Generative Adver-sarial Network (GAN) configurations. A comprehensive performance baseline comparison against state-of-the-art Transformer-based architectures and modern Denoising Diffusion Probabilistic Models (DDPMs) has not yet been executed. 

B. Future Work 

To advance the capabilities and real-world deployment effi-ciency of the proposed methodology, future research directions will focus on the following core domains:  

> •

Cross-Domain Validation: Future studies will aim to enhance the generalization capabilities of the network by incorporating more structurally diverse geological datasets and validating the model against multi-modal imaging approaches across alternative logging environ-ments.  

> •

Architectural Hybridization: Integrating foundational Transformer mechanisms or developing hybrid CNN-Transformer architectures will be explored to improve the framework’s capacity for capturing long-term global spatial dependencies across complex geological strata.  

> •

Three-Dimensional Volumetric Restoration: Extending the model from two-dimensional (2D) image inpainting to comprehensive three-dimensional (3D) volumetric re-construction represents a vital next step. This shift will ensure superior structural and spatial continuity across adjacent borehole sections. VI. C ONCLUSION 

An improved GAN-based model was developed for restora-tion of micro-resistivity imaging logging images with some missing parts or noise. The new architecture included the depth-wise separable convolutional residual block, Inception module, multi-scale feature extraction, channel attention resid-ual block, and dual-branch global local discriminator. The experimental evaluation of the model was carried out using the real-life dataset of imaging logging images. The results revealed that our method provided a very high average SSIM equal to 0.903 and superior performance in comparison with other popular GANs for the image restoration task in terms of quantitative measures and visual appearance. The images were characterized by better structure consistency, richer texture details, and semantic coherence, making further analysis easier and more accurate. Overall, we believe that the offered model represents an efficient solution to the problem of imaging logging image restoration and may be potentially used for various geological analysis tasks in petroleum exploration and production indus-try. REFERENCES [1] P. Rama, R. Sujatha, and S. P. Chatterjee, “Ir-gan: Image restoration via generative facial priors for low-quality historic imagery,” IEEE Transactions on Image Processing , vol. 30, pp. 1420–1432, 2021. [2] A. Tarang and K. Poonkuntran, “Deep generative adversarial frameworks for architectural heritage image inpainting,” Journal of Visual Commu-nication and Image Representation , vol. 78, p. 103152, 2021. [3] S. Mishra, R. Panda, and A. K. Jain, “Perceptual attention modules in generative adversarial frameworks for comprehensive image synthe-sis,” IEEE Transactions on Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence ,vol. 44, no. 9, pp. 5182–5195, 2022. [4] J. Wang, Z. Hou, Z. Zhang, M. Wang, and H. Cheng, “Combined deep-fill and histogram equalization algorithm for full-borehole electrical logging image restoration,” Processes , vol. 12, no. 8, p. 1568, 2024. [5] Y. Liu, X. Chen, L. Zhang, and H. Wang, “Gan-based inpainting method for electrical image logging data,” IEEE Access , vol. 10, pp. 48120– 48131, 2022. [6] F. Shang, K. Liu, and L. Jia, “Mural restoration using transformer-enhanced gan with group-wise multi-scale self-attention,” Journal of Cultural Heritage , vol. 61, pp. 112–124, 2023. [7] Y. Du and X. Tian, “T-gan: Transformer-based generative adversarial network for medical image super-resolution reconstruction,” Biomedical Signal Processing and Control , vol. 84, p. 104763, 2023. [8] Q. C. An, X. Li, and J. Ma, “Cascaded data consistency generative adversarial network for pet image reconstruction,” IEEE Transactions on Radiation and Plasma Medical Sciences , vol. 6, no. 4, pp. 432–441, 2022. [9] D. Zheng, M. Xu, and T. Zhang, “Lud-vae: Learning joint probability density functions from unpaired data for image restoration,” Pattern Recognition , vol. 139, p. 109451, 2023. [10] Z. Sun and M. Osama, “Pmdm-pet: Posterior-mean denoising diffusion model for pet image reconstruction,” Medical Image Analysis , vol. 91, p. 103012, 2024.