Title: GeRM: A Generative Rendering Model From Physically Realistic to Photorealistic

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2604.09304v1

Published Time: Mon, 13 Apr 2026 01:07:25 GMT

Number of Pages: 18

Markdown Content:
# GeRM: A Generative Rendering Model From Physically Realistic to Photorealistic 

# JIAYUAN LU ∗, State Key Lab of CAD&CG, Zhejiang University and Zhejiang Lab, China 

# RENGAN XIE ∗, State Key Lab of CAD&CG, Zhejiang University and Zhejiang Lab, China 

# XUANCHENG JIN, State Key Lab of CAD&CG, Zhejiang University and Zhejiang Lab, China 

# ZHIZHEN WU, State Key Lab of CAD&CG, Zhejiang University and Zhejiang Lab, China 

# QI YE, State Key Laboratory of Industrial Control Technology, Zhejiang University, China 

# TIAN XIE, Zhejiang University, China 

# HUJUN BAO, State Key Lab of CAD&CG, Zhejiang University and Zhejiang Lab, China 

# RUI WANG, State Key Lab of CAD&CG, Zhejiang University and Zhejiang Lab, China 

# YUCHI HUO †, State Key Lab of CAD&CG, Zhejiang University and Zhejiang Lab, China GeRM GeRM 

1 23 4

φρ

Fig. 1. Given the physical attributes as input, the physically realistic ( 𝜙 ) results produced by GeRM are shown on the left side of the figure, with greater photorealism ( 𝜌 ) as they move closer to the right. The sequence 1–4 illustrates this progressive realistic evolution: the model iteratively enriches the scene with realistic lighting dynamics (e.g., the warm sunlight and lamp glow), fine-grained material textures , and context-aware details (e.g., natural fabric wrinkles on the sofa), resulting in a high-fidelity photorealisitic image that consistent with the original image. 

For decades, Physically-Based Rendering (PBR) is the fundation of synthe-sizing photorealisitic images, and therefore sometimes roughly referred as 

> ∗

Both authors contributed equally to this research. 

> †

Corresponding author Authors’ Contact Information: Jiayuan Lu, 12321082@zju.edu.cn, State Key Lab of CAD&CG, Zhejiang University and Zhejiang Lab, China; Rengan Xie, rgxie@zju.edu.cn, State Key Lab of CAD&CG, Zhejiang University and Zhejiang Lab, China; Xuancheng Jin, xuanchengjin0@gmail.com, State Key Lab of CAD&CG, Zhejiang University and Zhejiang Lab, China; Zhizhen Wu, zhizhenwu@zju.edu.cn, State Key Lab of CAD&CG, Zhejiang University and Zhejiang Lab, China; Qi Ye, qi.ye@zju.edu.cn, State Key Laboratory of Industrial Control Technology, Zhejiang University, China; Tian Xie, rickyskyxie@zju.edu.cn, Zhejiang University, China; Hujun Bao, bao@cad.zju.edu.cn, State Key Lab of CAD&CG, Zhejiang University and Zhejiang Lab, China; Rui Wang, ruiwang@zju.edu.cn, State Key Lab of CAD&CG, Zhejiang University and Zhejiang Lab, China; Yuchi Huo, huo.yuchi.sc@gmail.com, State Key Lab of CAD&CG, Zhejiang University and Zhejiang Lab, China. 2024. ACM 1557-7368/2024/10-ART33 https://doi.org/XXXXXXX.XXXXXXX 

Photorealistic Rendering (PRR). While PBR is indeed a mathematical simu-lation of light transport that guarantees physical reality, photorealism has additional reliance on the realistic digital model of geometry and appearance of the real world, leaving a barely explored gap from PBR to PRR (P2P). Con-sequently, the path toward photorealism faces a critical dilemma: the explicit simulation of PRR encumbered by unreachable realistic digital models for real-world existence, while implicit generation models sacrifice controlla-bility and geometric consistency. Based on this insight, this paper presents the problem, data, and approach of mitigating P2P gap, followed by the first multi-modal generative rendering model, dubbed GeRM, to unify PBR and PRR. GeRM integrates physical attributes like G-buffers with text prompts, and progressive incremental injection to generate controllable photorealistic images, allowing users to fluidly navigate the continuum between strict physical fidelity and perceptual photorealism. Technically, we model the transition between PBR and PRR images as a distribution transfer and aim to learn a distribution transfer vector field (DTV Field) to guide this process. To define the learning objective, we first leverage a multi-agent VLM framework to construct an expert-guided pairwise P2P transfer dataset, named P2P-50K, 

ACM Trans. Graph., Vol. 11, No. 2, Article 33. Publication date: October 2024.          

> arXiv:2604.09304v1 [cs.CV] 10 Apr 2026 33:2 •Lu et al.
> where each paired sample in the dataset corresponds to a transfer vector in the DTV Field. Subsequently, we propose a multi-condition ControlNet to learn the DTV Field, which synthesizes PBR images and progressively transitions them into PRR images, guided by G-buffers, text prompts, and cues for enhanced regions.Further, since the gap between pairwise data is driven by subtle textual descriptions and lies in a different modality from images, it is not trivial to align the text prompts with multi-condition phys-ical inputs together to direct image distribution transfer. We propose an image transition perception boost to enhance GeRM’s ability to associate text prompts with the corresponding target editable regions, which more clearly defines the incremental component of the image transition. Extensive experiments demonstrate that GeRM synthesizes high-quality controllable images from PBR to PRR and outperforms baselines across diverse applications such as PBR image synthesis, image editing, and relight-ing. CCS Concepts: •Computing methodologies →Rendering ;Frame Ex-trapolation .Additional Key Words and Phrases: Diffusion Model, Generative Rendering
> ACM Reference Format:
> Jiayuan Lu, Rengan Xie, Xuancheng Jin, Zhizhen Wu, Qi Ye, Tian Xie, Hu-jun Bao, Rui Wang, and Yuchi Huo. 2024. GeRM: A Generative Rendering Model From Physically Realistic to Photorealistic. ACM Trans. Graph. 11, 2, Article 33 (October 2024), 18 pages. https://doi.org/XXXXXXX.XXXXXXX

1 Introduction 

Since the inception of computer graphics, one of the primary ob-jective has been clear and intuitive: to generate images that look exactly like photographs captured by a real camera. For decades, the industry has focused on erasing the visual boundary between a Computer Graphic Image (CGI) and a snapshot of reality. To achieve this, the evolution of rendering technology has been driven by an increasingly rigorous simulation of physical laws. From early techniques that merely approximated shapes to modern path tracing that strictly simulates light transport and energy conser-vation, the field has aimed to mathematically replicate how light interacts with matter. Nowadays Physically-Based Rendering (PBR) pipelines built upon the rendering equation [Kajiya 1986] can syn-thesize plausible photorealistic rendering (PRR) images, yet the results still exhibit a domain gap relative to real-world photos. We visualize the render route map as a P2P Quad in Fig. 2, from which we investigate issues in the PBR pipeline and the path toward pho-torealism. In fact, the photorealism of images synthesized by PBR pipelines is constrained by the digital essence( 𝐸 𝜙 ) - a collection of digital parametric representations of the real world, including geometry, textures, and appearance models, intended to approximate the un-derlying real-world essence ( 𝐸 𝜌 ) as comprehensively as possible. Nonetheless, such an approximation is constrained by current phys-ical models, limitations of acquisition hardware, computational ca-pability, and the enduring quest to understand nature and reality, thereby implying a persistent gap between digital existence and real-world existence, such as those intractably rich and unenumer-able detail. Therefore, PBR images ( 𝐼 𝜙 ) synthesized by the rendering equation, fall within a distribution distinct from PRR images ( 𝐼 𝜌 ), which is light transport result of real-world existence. How to syn-thesize a target photorealistic image from a digital existence that Light Transport Rendering Equation GeRM GeRM-PBR DTV DTV DTV RGB-X EPE CG2Real ICNet GeRM-PRR I

> φ

## E 

> φ

## E

> ρ

## I             

> ρ
> Ours-1
> ρOurs-2
> ρ
> Fig. 2. A P2P Quad characterizing the correlation between physical realism and photorealsm. 𝐼 𝜙 ,𝐼 𝜌 ,𝐸 𝜙 and 𝐸 𝜌 are physically realistic image, photore-alistic image, digital existence, and real-world existence, respectively.

is only a finite approximation of the real world remains an open problem in current human knowledge, as indicated by the dashed line in Fig. 2. Recently, image generation models like Stable Diffusion[Rombach et al . 2022] have achieved remarkable success. Trained on massive collections of real - world images, these methods learn the prior dis-tribution and enable progressive denoising from random noise to synthesize images that conform to the learned prior under control-lable conditions, which offers a new paradigm for image synthesis. RGB ↔X [Zeng et al . 2024] uses a refined diffusion model as a neu-ral renderer to synthesize PBR images from G - buffer inputs, which is a bold attempt. However, since it relies only on pairwise PBR data generated by a graphics engine or photos without paired G-buffer inputs, it is limited to producing images that adhere to the PBR distribution according to G-buffer inputs. EPE [Richter et al .2021a] uses a GAN to predict the target PRR image, but it is trained on limited game data and lacks paired cross - domain training data widely used in diffusion models, so the PRR output collapses to simple tone - mapping changes. Unfortunately, both RGB ↔X and EPE fail to generate critical physical details that distinguish CGI and real-world photo. IntrinsicControlNet(ICNet) [Lu et al . 2025] is the closest to our setting. It synthesizes plausible PRR images from G -buffer conditions, but without a paired physically realistic to photorealistic (P2P) dataset it relies on discriminator gradients, which provides no clear guidance and yield unstable realism. Despite the limitations of prior work, they inspire us in three ways. First , priors learned by models such as Stable Diffusion on large - scale real - world images can compensate for under modeled digital existence and enable P2P translation cross images. Second ,G - buffer signals provide key control that yields structurally correct and controllable outputs. Third , constructing paired P2P training data is essential for learning a clear translation direction. Building on these observations, we propose the first multimodal generative rendering model, dubbed GeRM, that unifies PBR and PRR synthesis. GeRM integrates physical attributes such as G -buffers with text prompts and employs progressive incremental injection to generate controllable photorealistic images, enabling users to fluidly navigate the continuum between strict physical fidelity and   

> ACM Trans. Graph., Vol. 11, No. 2, Article 33. Publication date: October 2024. GeRM: A Generative Rendering Model From Physically Realistic to Photorealistic •33:3

perceptual photorealism. In other words, it realizes the dashed tra-jectory in Fig. 2, reaching any point along the path from PBR to PRR. To realize GeRM, we model the transition between PBR and PRR images as a distribution transfer and aim to learn a distribution transfer vector field (DTV Field) to guide this process, following the same mechanism as diffusion models which apply a transfer vector to a noisy image and iteratively steer it toward the target distribution [Lipman et al. 2023]. We observe that directly learning a single transfer vector to map a PBR image to a PRR image in one step is difficult due to the absence of pairwise P2P images within two distinguish distributions. How-ever, we can decompose the process into multiple steps. If we can construct paired images where each original image is matched with a more PRR image that is closer to the final PRR distribution, then we can learn to predict a transfer vector that progressively moves the image toward the PRR distribution. For this purpose, we first lever-age a multi - agent VLM framework to construct an expert - guided pairwise P2P transfer dataset, where the visual understanding from the VLM guides the large image editing model to generate a more PRR image by drawing on its real - world priors learned from mas-sive data. Subsequently, we propose a multi -condition ControlNet to learn the DTV Field, which synthesizes PBR images and progres-sively transitions them into PRR images, guided by G - buffers, text prompts, and the carefully designed cues for specified enhanced regions. Further, since the gap between pairwise data is driven by subtle textual descriptions and lies in a different modality from im-ages, it is not trivial for the multi-condition ControlNet to learn to grasp the direction of image distribution transfer from text prompts. We propose an image transition perception boost to enhance its abil-ity to associate text prompts with the corresponding target editable regions, which more clearly defines the incremental component of the image transition. Finally, we introduce a pipeline that lever-ages GeRM to freely synthesize images from the PBR to the PRR distribution, and we incorporate Semantic Residual Monitoring to adaptively determine the progressive steps. Overall, our contributions are summarized as follows: 

• To the best of our knowledge, GeRM is the first multimodal generative rendering model that unifies PBR and PRR synthe-sis, enabling users to fluidly navigate the continuum between strict physical fidelity and perceptual photorealism. It intro-duces a novel pathway that bridges under-modeled digital existence to the synthesis of PRR images. 

• We propose to leverage a multi - agent VLM framework to construct an expert - guided pairwise P2P transfer dataset, named P2P-50K, where the visual understanding of the VLM and the real - world priors of a large image editing model form a robust synergy. 

• We propose a multi-condition ControlNet to learn the DTV Field, which synthesizes PBR images and progressively transi-tions them into PRR images, guided by G-buffers, text prompts, and cues for enhanced regions. 

• We propose an image transition perception boost to enhance its ability to associate text prompts with the corresponding target editable regions. 

• We introduce a generative rendering model, GeRM, based pipeline that freely synthesizes images across the PBR to PRR spectrum, while adaptively determines the progressive steps through semantic residual monitoring. 

2 Related Work 

Physically Realistic Rendering. Physically realistic rendering aims to synthesize images that are consistent with the physical laws of light transport and surface–material interactions, emphasizing physically grounded and explainable image formation instead of purely perceptual realism. This objective is formally characterized by the rendering equation [Kajiya 1986], which models outgoing radi-ance as an integral of incoming illumination modulated by material reflectance and geometric visibility, providing a unified theoretical foundation for physically based image rendering. Building upon this formulation, offline rendering techniques such as Monte Carlo path tracing [Veach 1998] and global illumination [Georgiev et al .2012; Jensen 1996] explicitly simulate multi-bounce light transport and complex indirect lighting effects, and are widely regarded as the gold standard for photorealistic rendering despite their substantial computational cost. In addition to accurate light transport, achiev-ing high visual realism critically depends on faithful scene modeling, including physically based material representations [Cook and Tor-rance 1982; Walter et al . 2007] and specialized appearance models for complex surfaces such as hair fibers [Zheng et al . 2025] and wo-ven cloth [Yu et al . 2025], which cannot be adequately captured by simple reflectance assumptions. However, due to the inherent com-plexity of real-world illumination, geometry, and material variabil-ity, faithfully reproducing photorealistic appearance under diverse conditions remains a challenging and active research problem. 

Generative Models for Image Synthesis. Recent years have wit-nessed significant progress in generative models for image synthesis, with diffusion-based [Dhariwal and Nichol 2021; Podell et al . 2024] and flow-based methods [Albergo and Vanden-Eijnden 2022; Lip-man et al . 2023; Liu et al . 2022] emerging as two dominant paradigms. These approaches model complex image distributions through iter-ative stochastic or deterministic processes, enabling high-quality image generation and distributional control. Owing to their strong expressive power and generative capability, recent generative mod-els have motivated growing interest in extending their use beyond conventional image synthesis, including their integration into neu-ral rendering pipelines [Liang et al . 2025; Zeng et al . 2024]. Many of these approaches can be interpreted as learning transformations between probability distributions through iterative stochastic or deterministic processes [Holderrieth and Erives 2025]. In particu-lar, flow matching formulates generation as the integration of a learned vector field that simulates an ordinary differential equation (ODE), providing a efficient framework for transforming simple source distributions into complex target distributions. Inspired by this perspective, our work adopts a distributional transformation viewpoint for rendering: instead of generating images from scratch, we formulate rendering as a process that progressively transforms physically based renderings toward photorealistic appearance, while preserving physical consistency through the consistent injection of G-buffer representations as conditioning signals.   

> ACM Trans. Graph., Vol. 11, No. 2, Article 33. Publication date: October 2024. 33:4 •Lu et al.

φ 1

## ρ 2

## ρ 6

## ρ 

> DTV DTV
> PBR PRR
> …
> Metallic
> Depth
> Roughness
> Irradiance
> Normal
> Albedo
> Albedo User Prompt
> “Add a blanket on the floor.”
> GPT-4o Generated Prompt
> “Adjust walls, floors, and ceiling for realistic textures and variations by incorporating imperfections, wear signs, dirt, and variation in tile patterns., 4k, photorealistic, ultra-detailed”
> User Mask
> Auto Mask
> Semi-Auto Mask

Prompt & Mask Conditions 

> CLIPSeg CLIPSeg

G-Buffer Conditions Progressive P2P Rendering via GeRM 

> Realistic-enhanced Region
> VAE Encoder
> VAE Decoder
> FLUX.1-dev ControlNet

+ Mask Gaunssian Noise Prompt Embedding 

> “original 3d render, raw output, cg, no change”
> User Prompt

Zero Mask 

# ∅

Fig. 3. Overview of our GeRM framework. Our pipeline operates on a multi-condition framework that integrates physical G-buffers with task-adaptive spatial constraints—ranging from zero masks for PBR synthesis to user-specified regions or VLM-driven automatic maps for editing and progressive realism. These combined inputs are fed into the multi-condition ControlNet, which predicts a distribution transfer vector (DTV) field. This DTV field guides the iterative evolution of the scene, transforming the initial physical state ( 𝜙 ) into the final photorealistic target ( 𝜌 6) via iteratively progressive generation. 

Semantic and Style Control for Photorealistic Image Gen-eration. Generating photorealistic images from physically based renders requires not only closing the global appearance gap be-tween synthetic and real imagery, but also maintaining fine-grained control over where such realism is applied. One line of research focuses on domain-level appearance transfer, where unpaired trans-lation methods such as CycleGAN [Zhu et al . 2017], CUT [Park et al .2020], and Deep CG2Real [Bi et al . 2019] align image statistics to map PBR renders to the photographic domain. While effective at preserving coarse structures, the realism achieved by these methods is largely constrained by the statistical distribution of the target dataset, limiting their ability to generate high-fidelity details beyond the observed training characteristics. In parallel, recent approaches leverage generative priors to synthesize realistic training data or directly generate photorealistic images [Bansal and Grover 2023]. However, global appearance transformations without physical con-straints hinder selective realism enhancement, motivating localized and semantic-aware image editing. Methods such as DiffEdit [Coua-iron et al . 2022] automatically infer editable regions by contrasting diffusion noise predictions, while PRISM [Dirik et al . 2025] and SmartBrush [Xie et al . 2023] incorporate user-provided masks or sketches to enforce strict spatial constraints. To further bridge se-mantic intent and spatial grounding, vision-language models in-cluding CLIPSeg [Lüddecke and Ecker 2022] and SAM [Kirillov et al . 2023] have been adopted to predict pixel-level masks directly from textual descriptions. Together, these works highlight the neces-sity of jointly considering photorealistic appearance transformation and semantic-aware spatial control, enabling realism to be applied selectively and consistently rather than through uniform global translation. 

3 Method 

To address the challenge of bridging the gap between PBR and PRR, we propose a progressive G-buffer and prompt-guided generative rendering framework. We formulate photorealistic rendering as an iterative distribution transfer process (Section 3.1), aiming to learn a vector field that evolves PBR distribution into PRR distribution without relying on explicit realism metrics. To compensate for the absence of explicit learnable metrics, we construct an expert-guided progressive pairwise P2P dataset (Section 3.2), which establishes the refinement trajectory through iterative steps guided by a multi-agent VLM. To parameterize the distribution transfer vector (DTV) field, we develop a multi-condition ControlNet (Section 3.3). This architecture employs a unified conditioning strategy to predict the precise state update, enabling both PBR synthesis and progressive PRR generation. Furthermore, to bridge the perceptual gap between textual prompts and spatial updates for controllable incremental realism injection, we introduce a cross-modal alignment mechanism (Section 3.4) that projects semantic intentions into explicit spatial attention fields. Finally, to verify the convergence of the iterative generation and consequently prevent structural collapse, we imple-ment an adaptive trajectory termination strategy (Section 3.5) based on semantic residual monitoring. To the best of our knowledge, this is the first framework to achieve progressive photorealistic genera-tion directly from unified G-buffer and prompt conditions, driven by a physically consistent distribution transfer formulation. 

3.1 Problem Statement 

From a generative modeling perspective, our goal is to train a model that produces samples from a target distribution conditioned on a set of control signals, which can be generally formulated as conditional generation. Such problems are commonly addressed by conditional flow-based or diffusion models. When paired training data are avail-able, models can directly learn a conditional distribution 𝑝 𝜃 (x | C).Alternatively, generation can be guided by reweighting a prior dis-tribution with an energy function ℓ (C, x), yielding samples drawn from 

x ∼ exp  − ℓ (C, x) · 𝑝 𝜃 (x), (1) where the energy term measures the alignment between the syn-thesized image x and the conditioning signal C, which in our case   

> ACM Trans. Graph., Vol. 11, No. 2, Article 33. Publication date: October 2024. GeRM: A Generative Rendering Model From Physically Realistic to Photorealistic •33:5

x denotes the rendered image to be synthesized and C represents physically based material properties together with other rendering-related control signals. However, formulating photorealistic rendering as a standard con-ditional generation problem poses fundamental challenges. First, the absence of paired PBR–PRR image data prevents directly learning the conditional distribution 𝑝 𝜃 (x | C). Second, the lack of an ex-plicit, optimizable supervision signal for perceptual realism makes it infeasible to define a meaningful energy function ℓ (C, x). Conse-quently, neither direct conditional learning nor energy-based guid-ance paradigms are applicable in our setting. Motivated by these limitations, we avoid directly modeling the direct PBR-to-PRR conditional distribution. Instead, we reformulate photorealistic rendering as a progressive transition process, where the generation is decomposed into multiple incremental steps. At each step, the model is tasked with predicting only distribution trans-fer vector (DTV) that moves the current rendering toward increased photorealism under the given control conditions. Concretely, we learn a conditional distribution 

𝑝 𝜃 (Δx | x, C), (2) where Δx represents a DTV applied to the current image. Under this formulation, the original challenges of defining a realism metrics or learning a direct PBR–PRR mapping are transformed into the more tractable problem of constructing paired datasets between a PBR rendering and a relatively more photorealistic intermediate result, enabling effective learning of the distribution transfer vector field, 

f𝜃 (x′ | x, C), (3) where x′ = x + Δx, x′ is the target under the distribution transfer from x.

3.2 Expert-Guided Progressive Pairwise P2P Transfer Dataset Construction 

To effectively learn the conditional distribution 𝑝 𝜃 defined in Eq. (3) ,we require high-quality training pairs that represent the trajectory from the source PBR state x0 to the PRR target x𝑇 . However, acquir-ing such aligned data is non-trivial. To bridge this gap, we construct the expert-guided progressive pairwise realism dataset, a large-scale collection designed to provide supervision signals for physically consistent, progressive photorealistic image generation. To ensure comprehensive scene fidelity and reduce the seman-tic hallucinations common in single-pass descriptions, we adopt a collaborative approach. As shown in Fig. 5, we employ a multi-agent visual language model (VLM) framework to act as a prompt generation expert. Within this framework, three specialized agents collaborate to critique the scene: The Global Auditor evaluates the overall image quality, specifically checking for unnatural lighting and overly simplified surfaces; the Contextual Enricher upgrades the scene fidelity, compensates simple shapes and plain materials with realistic details; and the Local Refiner refines the layout by adding reasonable items to empty areas to make the scene look more complete. Based on this collective critique, the agents gener-ate a textual refinement prompt, which is subsequently processed by CLIPSeg [Lüddecke and Ecker 2022] to produce a corresponding spatial mask M𝑡 . This semantic mask localizes the update to specific regions, acting as a spatial guide for the DTV Δx𝑡 from the PBR to the PRR distribution at time step 𝑡 .FLUX.1-Kontext-dev Engine Render Implausive Insertion Spatial Shift  

> Spatial Alignment High-Fidelity Low-Fidelity Logic Insersion Nano Banana Ours-
> Not Photorealistic
> Photorealistic
> Fig. 4. Why SOTA Editing Models Are Insufficient for Photorealistic Gen-eration. Under the progressive prompts shortened like “physically realistic appearance,” Nano Banana appears synthetic and Kontext unstable, whereas ours achieves superior photorealism and spatial alignment.

Conditioned on these instructions, we utilize FLUX.1-Kontext-dev as the backbone to execute the progressive distribution transfer 

x𝑡 → x𝑡 +1. We prioritize this model for its photorealistic capability. However, as shown in Fig. 4, directly applying powerful editing mod-els such as FLUX or Nano Banana to synthesize PRR images often leads to geometric or material inconsistencies, due to the absence of explicit G-buffer conditioning that enforces physical alignment. Although it tends to introduce those artifacts, mitigating these er-rors via preprocessing is significantly more tractable than inducing realism in structurally stable but synthetic-looking alternatives like Nano Banana [Nano Banana Team 2025]. Specifically, the dataset generation process is dynamic: at each iteration step 𝑡 + 1, the multi-agent system re-evaluates the newly generated image x𝑡 to generate a fresh, context-aware prompt for the subsequent refinement. Nevertheless, while increasing the num-ber of steps theoretically allows for a smoother transition from PBR to PRR distribution, excessive step would introduce considerable ac-cumulated errors in the generation. Based on extensive experiments (more details in Appendix D.1 ), we identify six steps as providing an optimal trade-off between photorealism and stability. Furthermore, to ensure dataset quality, we employ a data filtering mechanism to discard samples exhibiting excessive noise or semantic drift. We also apply spatial alignment to correct minor pixel shifts inherent to the generative process, ensuring pixel-perfect consistency with the G-buffers. Visualizations of these refined P2P dataset samples are presented in Fig. 6. Ultimately, this pipeline yields a robust set of paired progressive P2P training samples, resulting in a comprehen-sive dataset comprising 30,000 indoor scenes, 5,000 outdoor scenes, and 10,000 single-object assets. 

3.3 Multi-Condition ControlNet for PBR Consistent Image Synthesis and Transfer 

With the constructed dataset in place, we train a model to learn the conditional distribution of the DTV field defined in Eq. (3) . During inference, the process begins by synthesizing a base PBR image derived from the G - buffer and the text prompt. Subsequently, this    

> ACM Trans. Graph., Vol. 11, No. 2, Article 33. Publication date: October 2024. 33:6 •Lu et al. Kontext

# ... Kontext Prompt Generation Expert Engine Render   

> Semantic Mask Semantic Mask
> Kontext-Kontext-
> “Enhance the brick wall texture with varied coloration and add imperfections such as chips and stains for a realistic appearance.”

:  

> VLM-Generated Prompt CLIPSeg CLIPSeg

: 

> VLM-Generated Prompt
> “Adjust the wooden floor finish to reduce glossiness, add natural wood grain variation, and introduce slight mismatchs in the herringbone pattern.”
> VLM

What looks unreal about this picture? 

:

# :Global Auditor Contextual Enricher Local Refiner 

> Physics and Light Coherence and Realism Narrative Authenticity
> and "Lived-In" Quality
> Fine-Grained Scrutiny and Object-level Detail Iterative Realism Prompt

1 2 31 

> ρ6
> ρ

Fig. 5. Pipeline for constructing the progressive pairwise P2P dataset. We employ a multi-agent VLM framework—comprising the Global Auditor , Contextual Enricher , and Local Refiner —to collaboratively generate realistic refinement prompts based on the current state. These prompts are fed into CLIPSeg to produce spatial semantic masks, accurately localizing the regions for realistic modification. Guided by these spatially grounded instructions, the generative backbone (Kontext) executes localized updates, progressively evolving the sterile Engine Render into a photorealistic state (Kontext-𝜌 𝑡 ). 

representation is iteratively refined toward the PRR target by aug-menting the physical anchors with semantic modulation. Within this framework, the current rendering x𝑡 acts as a realistic prior which leverages the integrated physical and semantic controls to direct the network to generate the x𝑡 +1, which transitions from x𝑡 

and approaches PRR more closely. Formally, we employ a unified conditioning strategy to synthesize from the PBR to the PRR distribution. In all stages, the network accepts a 21-channel control tensor constructed by concatenating the physical conditions C ∈ R𝐻 ×𝑊 ×18 —comprising six PBR buffers (albedo, roughness, metallic, normal, depth, and irradiance)—with a semantic modulation mask M𝑡 ∈ R𝐻 ×𝑊 ×3, which serves as a spatial attention field derived from the cross-modal alignment mechanism (detailed in Sec. 3.4). Consequently, the network predicts the more PRR x𝑡 +1 at time step 𝑡 as follows: 

x𝑡 +1 = f𝜃 (z𝑡 , 𝑡, C, Mt, y𝑡 ), (4) where the f𝜃 is our multi-condition ControlNet, regarded as the DTV field, with parameter 𝜃 , y𝑡 is the textual instruction, and z is a noisy latent of x𝑡 for consistent transition: for the initial PBR synthesis, it is sampled from a standard Gaussian distribution z0 ∼ N ( 0, I),whereas for the PRR evolution, it is initialized from the encoding of the previous state z𝑡 = E ( x𝑡 ), where E (·) denotes an encoder that maps the current rendering state into a latent representation. Also we define the DTV Δx𝑡 as: 

Δx𝑡 =

(

f𝜃 (z𝑡 , 𝑡, C), 𝑡 = 0,

f𝜃 (z𝑡 , 𝑡, C, y𝑡 ) − f𝜃 (z𝑡 −1, 𝑡 − 1, C, M𝑡 −1, y𝑡 −1), 𝑡 > 0. (5) Note that the continuous injection of G-buffer conditions C acts as a physical anchor, actively rectifying the spatial drift and er-ror accumulation that typically plague standard iterative editing frameworks. Finally, to learn the underlying distribution transfer vector field that dictates the state updates Δx𝑡 under unified controls spanning both PBR initialization and progressive PRR evolution, we train the network to learn the DTV from the constructed paired dataset, which provides supervision on how the rendering state should evolve toward photorealism. This learning process can be formulated as follows: 

L = E𝑡,𝑥 𝑡 +1,𝑥 𝑡 [Δ ˆ𝑥 𝑡 − ( 𝑥 𝑡 +1 − 𝑥 𝑡 )] 22 , (6) where 𝑡 represents the step, x𝑡 denotes the source state originating from either Gaussian noise or the encoded state of the previous iteration, x𝑡 +1 corresponds to the target ground truth from our paired P2P dataset and Δ ˆ𝑥 𝑡 is the final DTV predicted by our model. Please see Appendix D.2 for training details. To further enhance the flexibility of this physical control, we enable the network to robustly handle partial inputs and foster physical channel decoupling, allowing for the independent editing of specific G-buffer subsets. To this end, we employ a Bernoulli channel dropout strategy during training 

C = Concat (c1 · 𝑏 1, . . . , c6 · 𝑏 6), where 𝑏 𝑖 ∼ Bernoulli (𝑝 𝑖 ), (7) where c𝑖 (1 ≤ 𝑖 ≤ 6) represents the specific G-buffer component corresponding to albedo, roughness, metallic, normal, depth, and ir-radiance, respectively, and 𝑏 𝑖 ∈ { 0, 1} indicates the binary inclusion state for each buffer sampled with retention probability 𝑝 𝑖 .

3.4 Enhance Perception of Image Transition Increment 

As established in Eq. (4) , we formulate the P2P process as a dis-tribution transfer, where each iteration x𝑡 → x𝑡 +1 represents an incremental shift along a trajectory towards the target distribution. Ideally, this evolution should be perceptibly guided by the textual in-structions y, where specific semantic changes in the prompt dictate the corresponding spatial updates in the image. However, a critical perceptual gap arises in this multimodal map-ping is that the network often struggles to establish a correspon-dence between the textual description of change and the actual visual distribution transition. Even when trained with pairwise transfer data we construct in Section 3.2, the model lacks explicit guidance to associate specific semantic tokens (e.g., “add cracks” or “remove clutter”) with their resulting significant differentials. Consequently, the model fails to perceive which part of the prompt is responsible for driving the distribution shift, leading to a failure 

> ACM Trans. Graph., Vol. 11, No. 2, Article 33. Publication date: October 2024.

GeRM: A Generative Rendering Model From Physically Realistic to Photorealistic • 33:7 Enhance lighting and shadow                        

> gradations to reflect natural light dynamics and improve depth and contrast. Incorporate personalized
> decorative items and enhance object placement to convey a lived-in, casual environment.
> Refine small props with detailed textures and unique shapes, using materials like wood and ceramic with visible grains and distinctive finishes.
> Adjust the walls, ceiling, and floor
> by adding realistic textures , such as imperfections, stains, scuff marks, wood grain variations , and subtle shifts in sheen. Introduce a mix of different
> plush toys with slight deformities and fabric imperfections, and ensure floor cushions appear naturally creased and indented.
> Diversify plush toys with unique shapes and intricate details, while
> preserving key props like books, scattered toys , the drawing board, and atmospheric lighting.
> Add texture and imperfections to walls, ceiling, and floor ,incorporating scuffs, marks, and subtle variations in color and texture .
> Add texture details to furniture ,emphasizing fabric textures on the couch and pillows, and enhancing wood grain variations for wooden surfaces .Personalize the space with family photos, a sculpture, and a throw blanket , rearranging elements to achieve an 'organized chaos' aesthetic with signs of daily use.
> G-buffers Engine Render Kontext-1Kontext-3Kontext-6Prompt-1Prompt-3Prompt-6
> ... ... ... ... ... ...

Fig. 6. Visualization of the constructed pairwise P2P dataset. We utilize FLUX.1-Kontext-dev to generate pairwise P2P samples from Engine Render image. We filter out these outputs with excessive noise and spatially aligned with the corresponding G-buffers and the original Engine Render. The realistic prompts shown above are generated by the multi-agent VLM framework described in Sec. 3.2. For brevity, we display representative samples from selected progressive steps ( 𝜌 1, 𝜌 3, 𝜌 6). 

where the predicted v𝜃 lacks spatial focus, resulting in weak or irrelevant updates that ignore fine-grained instructions. To bridge this disconnect and effectively align the semantic differ-ential with the spatial incremental update, we introduce transition perception boost for cross-modal alignment that employs a mapping strategy to directly translate abstract semantic instructions y into an explicit attention mask M. First, we extract the target entity from the textual prompt and project it onto the current PRR visual state 

x𝑡 :

𝑒 1 = 𝑆𝑝𝑎𝐶𝑦 (yt), M𝑟𝑎𝑤 = S𝑐𝑙𝑖𝑝 (x𝑡 , 𝑒 1). (8) Specifically, we employ the linguistic parser SpaCy [Honnibal and Montani 2017] to analyze the syntactic structure of the prompt y,filtering out abstract command verbs to isolate the salient noun entity 𝑒 1. We then utilize the CLIPSeg encoder S𝑐𝑙𝑖𝑝 [Lüddecke and Ecker 2022], which functions as a zero-shot segmentation model capable of performing pixel-wise alignment between visual features and arbitrary text queries, to generate a raw probability map M𝑟𝑎𝑤 

based on this entity. To ensure the incremental update Δx𝑝𝑟𝑒𝑑 (as defined in Eq. (5) ) blends seamlessly with the surrounding context, we apply a morphological smoothing operation to M𝑟𝑎𝑤 :

M𝑡 = (M𝑟𝑎𝑤 ⊕ K 𝑑𝑖𝑙 ) ∗ G 𝜎 . (9) Here, ⊕ denotes morphological dilation with a structural element 

K𝑑𝑖𝑙 , and ∗ represents convolution with a Gaussian kernel G𝜎 . The 

M𝑟𝑎𝑤 is determined by a flexible dual-source strategy. It can be ei-ther autonomously generated via CLIPSeg predictions filtered by an empirical confidence threshold 𝜏 , which is adjustable based on user requirements, or explicitly defined by a specified region provided by the user ( M𝑟𝑎𝑤 = M𝑢𝑠𝑒𝑟 ) for precise manual control. Regardless of the source, this post-processing is critical for visual consistency. Specifically, the morphological dilation ensures the mask fully en-compasses the target object to prevent boundary leakage. Simul-taneously, the Gaussian smoothing creates a soft transition zone that forces the update magnitude to decay gradually at the edges, effectively preventing hard-seam artifacts and ensuring a natural fusion between the modified region and the background. Finally, to ensure the learnt vector field captures valid incremen-tal changes, we rigorously filter the training data. As detailed in the Appendix D.3 , we employ a visual-semantic alignment strategy that calculates pixel-wise residuals masked by semantic intent to guarantee that the optimization objective (Eq. 6) focuses on regions where the distribution has effectively transfered. 

3.5 Adaptive Trajectory Termination via Semantic Residual Monitoring 

Driven by the learned Distribution Transfer Vector (DTV) field, our framework iteratively evolves the source PBR state toward the target PRR distribution. However, the precise trajectory length required to fully achieve photorealism varies across different scenes and cannot be known in advance. Empirically, we observe a distinct convergence behavior (as visualized in Fig. 14): as the generated image gets close to the ideal photorealistic state, the model stops making meaningful changes and instead starts to oscillate slightly around the final PRR result. Consequently, arbitrarily enforcing a fixed iteration count is rigid; we require a rational mechanism to verify convergence. Once the distribution transfer reaches the target PRR state, the distribution transfer vector field naturally diminishes, meaning that subsequent iterations yield negligible perceptual improvements. To adaptively determine this stopping point, we introduce the se-mantic intensity ( 𝐼 𝑡 ) check. This metric integrates two critical indica-tors to monitor the progressive generation status: (1) the pixel-wise residual, where a decrease indicates that the generative backbone considers the current region sufficiently optimized and requires no further modification; and (2) the semantic attention map, where a diminishing response implies that the current textual prompt is no longer semantically relevant to the visual content. Mathematically, 

𝐼 𝑡 is calculated as the mask-weighted sum of the residuals, ensuring that a decline in either factor triggers termination: 

𝐼 𝑡 = M𝑡 · ∥ x𝑡 +1 − x𝑡 ∥1, (10) Here, M𝑡 ensures the metric focuses strictly on the semantic area of interest, while the residual term ∥x𝑡 +1 − x𝑡 ∥1 detects the saturation of the generation process. When 𝐼 𝑡 falls below a threshold 𝜏 𝑠𝑡𝑜𝑝 , we 

ACM Trans. Graph., Vol. 11, No. 2, Article 33. Publication date: October 2024. 33:8 • Lu et al. Engine Render Ours- RGB X IntrinsicControlnet 

Ground Truth EPE-Cityscapes EPE-KITTI EPE-MapillaryVistas 

Input G-buffers Ours-

Ours-  

> Fig. 7. Comparisons of PBR synthesis and PRR generation on indoor and outdoor scenes. Given input G-buffers (leftmost), the region left of the dashed line validates physical accuracy against Engine Render and RGB ↔X. The region to the right evaluates our final PRR generation against IntrinsicControlNet. The bottom row further establishes our PRR generation against GAN-based EPE models trained on Cityscapes [Cordts et al .2016], KITTI [Geiger et al .2012], and Mapillary Vistas [Neuhold et al. 2017] datasets.

consider the scene converged to the PRR distribution and terminate the inference. This termination strategy is empirically validated in our convergence experiments (see Sec. 4.4.4, Fig. 14, and Fig. 15), which demonstrate that 𝐼 𝑡 effectively signals the saturation point of our P2P transfer. 

4 Experiments 4.1 Datasets and Training Strategy 

We trained our model on a diverse collection of 45,000 image pairs. To cover different scenes, we selected indoor scenes from Hypersim [Roberts et al . 2021] and Zhu et al . [2023], outdoor scenes from MatrixCity [Li et al . 2023], and single objects from Objaverse [Deitke et al . 2022]. All images were resized to 512 × 512 pixels. The training was carried out on the FLUX.1-dev ControlNet [Labs 2024] using two 80GB GPUs equivalent to the NVIDIA A100 with a batch size of 32. Importantly, to demonstrate true generalization, all the visual results shown here are generated from data not included in the training set. 

4.2 Evaluation Metrics 

Quantifying photorealism remains an open challenge in the com-munity, with no tailored metric currently available, as mentioned in Section 3.1. Consequently, we combine available quantitative        

> ACM Trans. Graph., Vol. 11, No. 2, Article 33. Publication date: October 2024. GeRM: A Generative Rendering Model From Physically Realistic to Photorealistic •33:9 Engine Render Irradiance IntrinsicEdit RGB XOurs-Ours-
> Fig. 8. Visual comparison of editing irradiance. Our PRR results demonstrate superior controllability: the PBR results (Ours-𝜙 ) ensures physical alignment with the target lighting (Engine Render), and the final PRR output (Ours-𝜌 ) achieves photorealism while preserving the altered lighting structure.

metrics with user studies to comprehensively assess our method across different sub-tasks. 

4.2.1 Quantitative Metrics. To conduct a rigorous and objective evaluation of our framework, we categorize the employed metrics into two primary aspects: 

PBR Accuracy and Structural Preservation. We utilize PSNR, SSIM [Wang et al . 2004], and LPIPS [Zhang et al . 2018] to quantify pixel-level accuracy and perceptual sharpness against ground truth, ensuring background preservation in unmasked regions. To enforce structural plausibility, we employ DINOv2 Similarity [Oquab et al .2023], which leverages geometry sensitive features to ensure adher-ence to the semantic layout. Additionally, we use CLIP (Global-I) score to measure the high-level visual semantic similarity between our PBR output and the reference engine rendered image, validating the accuracy of our PBR process. 

PRR Quality and Semantic Alignment. To evaluate generative PRR quality, we measure distributional distances using KID [2018] computed on approximately 300 generated samples against the ADE20K [Zhou et al . 2019] dataset to assess the P2P gap. For seman-tic alignment, we employ CLIP Score (Text) [Radford et al . 2021] across three dimensions: Global for overall image-text consistency, 

Local for semantic alignment within the modified region, and Di-rectional to measures how well the visual changes applied to the original image correspond to the text instruction. We further utilize BLIP [Li et al . 2022] to evaluate vision-language alignment, ensuring the generated content semantically matches the prompt descriptions. Finally, to quantify human-aligned quality, we rely on ImageReward (IR) [Xu et al . 2023] and Aesthetic Score (Aes) [Schuhmann et al .2022], which serve as proxies for human preference and artistic value. Additionally, we report ΔCLIP, defined as the net increase in the global CLIP score relative to the source image, to measure the absolute improvement in semantic alignment. To evaluate the com-prehensive trade-off between structural preservation and editing accuracy, we introduce Q-Score, calculated as the harmonic mean of SSIM and Local CLIP score. 

4.2.2 User Study. To quantify the perceptual photorealism of our PRR results, we conducted a user preference study utilizing 15 distinct scenes with varying geometric complexities and illumi-nation conditions. We selected representative methods from three primary categories: standard graphics engines, state-of-the-art gen-erative models, and our proposed approach. For physical rendering pipelines, we included high-quality results from industry-standard rendering engines, specifically Unreal Engine 5 [Epic Games [n. d.]], Mitsuba3 [Jakob et al . 2022], Blender [Blender Foundation [n. d.]], and Falcor [Kallweit et al . 2022]. For the generative baseline, we se-lected FLUX.1-Kontext-dev [Labs et al . 2025] and NanoBanana [Nano Banana Team 2025] to represent text-guided image editing capabili-ties, along with IntrinsicControlNet [Lu et al . 2025], which special-izes in physically aware conditioning for photorealistic generation. Additionally, to validate the incremental efficacy of our approach, we included results generated at different PRR steps of our framework. The study involved a total of 40 participants, comprising a bal-anced distribution of genders with ages ranging from 20 to 50. Cru-cially, the participant pool was composed of both domain experts (including computer graphics researchers and 3D artists) and gen-eral users, ensuring that the evaluation captured both professional technical scrutiny and general aesthetic preference. The experiment followed a strict blind, randomized ranking protocol. For each trial, participants saw a shuffled set of images and were asked to rank them based on how much they looked like a real photograph. To ensure clear distinctions, we required a strict ranking where no ties were allowed. This approach required participants to carefully compare textures, lighting, and shadows, allowing them to distin-guish subtle differences even in high-quality results. For detailed calculation formulas, please see Appendix E .  

> ACM Trans. Graph., Vol. 11, No. 2, Article 33. Publication date: October 2024. 33:10 •Lu et al.

“A living room and the floor is made of wood.” 

“A car is running on the street and trees are beside the buildings.” 

> Engine Render

“A laundry room and a basket of clothes is on the floor.”             

> DiffEdit Ours--UserMask UserMask FLUX.1-Fill-dev ICEdit FLUX.1-Kontext-dev Original Images DiffEdit UserMask FLUX.1-Fill-dev ICEdit FLUX.1-Kontext-dev Original Images DiffEdit UserMask FLUX.1-Fill-dev ICEdit FLUX.1-Kontext-dev
> Nano Banana
> Nano Banana
> Nano Banana
> Input G-buffers
> Input G-buffers
> Input G-buffers
> Ours--UserMask
> Ours--UserMask
> Ours--AutoMask
> Ours--AutoMask
> Ours--AutoMask

Fig. 9. Visual comparison of transition perception boost for progressive semantic injection. We evaluate the framework across diverse editing scenes under two guidance protocols. The first row for each case utilizes explicit user masks to guide FLUX.1-Fill-dev and Ours-𝜌 -UserMask. The second row relies exclusively on textual prompts, comparing our automated masking strategy (Ours-𝜌 -AutoMask) against implicit masking methods (DiffEdit, ICEdit) and state-of-the-art text-guided editors (Nano Banana, FLUX.1-Kontext-dev). Crucially, distinct from baselines that modify original images, our method generates photorealism directly from G-buffer constraints. The results demonstrate that our approach achieves superior semantic precision and structural preservation across both interactive and automated injection modes. 

4.3 Comparison with Baselines 

We evaluate our proposed framework against state-of-the-art base-lines across diverse applications, including PBR image synthesis, image editing, and relighting. To ensure a fair and reproducible comparison, we select baselines whose official training or infer-ence codes are available. Given that no single existing framework   

> ACM Trans. Graph., Vol. 11, No. 2, Article 33. Publication date: October 2024. GeRM: A Generative Rendering Model From Physically Realistic to Photorealistic •33:11

Blender Mitsuba3 Engine Render 

Falcor 

UE5 

Input G-buffers Ours-

Fig. 10. Visual comparison of our iterative PRR generation against standard rendering engines. From left to right: input G-buffers, the baseline render from various engines (Mitsuba3, Blender, Falcor, and UE5), and the PRR results generated by our method. As shown in the four right columns, our approach gradually enhances the realism of the scene, generating details and lighting effects that surpass the original engine renders. Table 1. Quantitative comparison of semantic-aware editing. We evaluate methods using explicit user masks (Ours-𝜌 -UserMask, FLUX.1-Fill-dev) and implicit automatic masks (Ours-𝜌 -AutoMask, DiffEdit, ICEdit). FLUX.1-Kontext-dev serves as the backbone for our dataset construction, while Nano Banana represents a state-of-the-art commercial solution (masking mechanism undisclosed). Note that this comparison focuses on editing capabilities without photorealism-enhancing prompts. Our methods (both User and Auto variants) consistently rank high across metrics, demonstrating superior overall quality while maintaining a robust balance between background preservation accuracy and semantic alignment. Red , Orange , and Yellow indicate 1st, 2nd, and 3rd best results. 

BG Accuracy Semantic Alignment Overall Quality Method PSNR ↑ SSIM ↑ DINO ↑ Global-T ↑ Local-T ↑ Dir-T ↑ BLIP ↑ IR ↑ Aes ↑ ΔCLIP-T ↑ Q-Score ↑

Ours-𝜌 -UserMask 25.67 0.8758 0.9551 0.2112 0.2458 0.1013 0.6953 -0.2284 3.9603 0.0457 0.3823 FLUX.1-Fill-dev 31.62 0.9452 0.9883 0.1919 0.2055 0.0740 0.3798 -1.3512 3.9582 0.0264 0.3366 Ours-𝜌 -AutoMask 25.31 0.8534 0.9304 0.1958 0.2457 0.0760 0.6570 -0.2343 3.9602 0.0304 0.3790 FLUX.1-Kontext-dev 15.39 0.4575 0.6764 0.2078 0.2214 0.0748 0.7486 0.7990 3.9577 0.0424 0.2877 DiffEdit 24.13 0.8397 0.9276 0.1664 0.1805 0.0002 0.0443 -1.9112 3.9596 0.0009 0.2952 ICEdit 25.12 0.8440 0.8418 0.2046 0.2194 0.0773 0.3635 -0.9130 3.9601 0.0392 0.3470 Nano Banana 23.81 0.8163 0.9683 0.1973 0.1987 0.1088 0.6595 0.2074 3.9592 0.0319 0.3166 

Table 2. Quantitative comparsion on PBR synthesis. " ∗" means masked images on single object scenes. 

PSNR ↑ SSIM ↑ LPIPS ↓ CLIP (Global-I) ↑

Ours-𝜙 30.17 0.9520 0.0469 0.9907 

RGB ↔X 9.6972 0.3915 0.4986 0.8861 RGB ↔X* 21.61 0.9129 0.0796 0.9497 encompasses this unified capability, we compare against special-ized, task-specific methods to evaluate our performance in each application domain. 

4.3.1 G-buffer-to-RGB Generation. We evaluate our PBR synthesis and PRR generation quality across various scenes. Visual compar-isons for indoor and outdoor environments are presented in Fig. 7, while additional results on single-object assets are provided in Ap-pendix B .

For PBR synthesis , we evaluate the physical accuracy by compar-ing our method with RGB ↔X [Zeng et al . 2024]. As observed in the third row of Fig. 7, our method accurately reconstructs high-frequency details such as the specular reflections on the glossy floor. In contrast, RGB ↔X introduces significant lighting artifacts, of-ten manifesting as unnatural halos or erroneous shadow rendering rather than faithful global illumination. Notably, even though these indoor scenes are included in the training dataset of RGB ↔X, it       

> ACM Trans. Graph., Vol. 11, No. 2, Article 33. Publication date: October 2024. 33:12 •Lu et al. Change Structure  Change Rough./Metal.  Change Irradiance Change Albedo
> “The quilt is neat.” “The wall is flat.”
> “Change the picture on the wall.”
> Keep Editing
> “Decrease the highlight on the wall.”
> Engine Render Edited Conditions Ours
> Irradiance Roughness
> Ours w/o RD
> Engine Render
> Albedo Normal Edited Conditions Ours w/o RD
> RGB X
> RGB X
> Keep Editing
> Original
> Normal Albedo Irradiance Normal IntrinsicEdit
> IntrinsicEdit
> Ours

Fig. 11. Demonstration of progressive editing on different subsets of G-buffer channels. We visualize two editing sequences (top and bottom panels) where edits are applied sequentially from top to bottom. In each row, the generation builds upon the result from the previous step, controlled by the specific edited G-buffer channel or text prompt shown in the “Edited Conditions” column. We compare our method against an ablation variant without random dropout (w/o RD), RGB ↔X, and IntrinsicEdit. 

still fails to reproduce the ground truth fidelity. To ensure fairness and rule out background interference on sigle object scenes, we evaluated the baseline with the background masked out, denoted as RGB ↔X∗ in Tab. 2. As shown in the quantitative results, our method achieves superior accuracy compared to RGB ↔X∗, confirming its robust capability to produce clean and ground-truth-aligned results. 

For PRR generation , we compare against IntrinsicControlNet [Lu et al . 2025] and GAN-based EPE [Richter et al . 2021b] methods. While IntrinsicControlNet generates realistic textures, it suffers from severe structural degradation. For instance, in the bedroom study depicted in the second row of Fig. 7, IntrinsicControlNet dis-torts the bookshelf geometry and blurs book details. On the other hand, GAN-based EPE often exhibits coarse artifacts across different real-world styles. As observed in the outdoor scenes, these methods frequently produce rough edges and unnatural transitions, particu-larly noticeable in the rendering of roadside trees and sky regions. By leveraging our P2P training strategy and dataset, our model ef-fectively strikes a superior balance between structural fidelity and authentic, creative generation. 

4.3.2 Semantic-aware Incremental Editing. To evaluate our PRR pipeline on the semantic-aware incremental editing task, we conduct comparisons under two distinct settings: user-specified semantic masking and automatic masking (driven by prompt-guided CLIPSeg). The qualitative results are presented in Fig. 9. 

User-Specified Masking. We compare our method against the state-of-the-art inpainting model, FLUX.1-Fill-dev [Labs 2024]. Our approach demonstrates superior context awareness, particularly   

> ACM Trans. Graph., Vol. 11, No. 2, Article 33. Publication date: October 2024. GeRM: A Generative Rendering Model From Physically Realistic to Photorealistic •33:13 Engine Render Real Photo  Ours-
> Fig. 12. Comparison between our PRR results (Top), engine rendered images (Middle), and real-world reference photographs (Bottom). Our method effectively bridges the P2P gap, enriching sterile engine renders and white meshes with natural illumination, volumetric shadows, and realistic weathering effects, achieving a visual fidelity comparable to real-world photo.

when handling coarse user masks, for instance, in the “Living Room” scene (top row, Fig. 9), where the baseline struggles with occlusion artifacts on the floor beneath the chair, our G-buffer-guided synthe-sis intelligently infers underlying geometry to seamlessly resolve boundary conflicts. Furthermore, our method excels in multi-task spatial assignment. As seen in the “Street” scene (bottom row), where FLUX.1-Fill-dev confuses region-specific objects, our semantic adap-tive strategy correctly disentangles the layout (e.g., placing cars on the road and trees on the sidewalk). Quantitatively, as shown in Tab. 1, while our adaptive regeneration of mask boundaries leads to slightly lower pixel-wise metrics (PSNR/SSIM) compared to methods enforcing rigid masking, our generative quality metrics significantly outperform the baseline, reflecting enhanced visual-semantic coher-ence and realism.       

> Table 3. Quantitative evaluation of photorealism. US denotes user study. To strictly measure the capability of generating photorealistic images and details, we employ highly detailed realistic prompts generated by GPT-4o. Our method achieves state-of-the-art performance in terms of realism and text-image alignment. Red ,Orange , and Yellow indicate top 3 results.

US ↑ KID ↓ CLIP (Global-T) ↑ IR ↑

Ours-𝜌 3 3.52 0.05834 0.2883 -0.3197 Ours-𝜌 6 3.99 0.04572 0.2920 -0.2084 ICNet 1.40 0.06804 0.2806 -0.5022 FLUX.1-Kontext 2.50 0.05975 0.2830 -0.3017 Nano Banana 2.48 0.09024 0.2783 -0.4468 Mitsuba3 1.13 0.08010 0.2857 -0.5444 Blender 2.07 0.07338 0.2815 -0.4427 Falcor 1.53 0.15173 0.2515 -0.9577 UE5 2.40 0.07388 0.2780 -0.5214 

Automatic Masking. For prompt-only editing, we evaluate against DiffEdit [Couairon et al . 2022], ICEdit [Zhang et al . 2025], FLUX.1-Kontext-dev [Labs et al . 2025], and the commercial tool Nano Ba-nana [Nano Banana Team 2025]. DiffEdit and ICEdit exhibit limi-tations in boundary precision; specifically, DiffEdit’s noise-based masking often yields imprecise segmentation, while ICEdit tends to modify regions beyond the intended target. For instance, in the “Laundry Room” (middle row, Fig. 9), ICEdit inadvertently replaces                                      

> Table 4. Quantitative ablation study. BG Acc., SA, P2P, RD, and TPB stand for background accuracy, semantic alignment, our P2P dataset, random dropout, and transition perception boost, respectively. Photorealism denotes step-average metrics. Results show P2P is vital for realism, while other com-ponents mainly remain semantic alignment and background preservation.
> BG Acc. SA Photorealism Method PSNR ↑SSIM ↑CLIP(Loc-T) ↑IR ↑KID ↓CLIP(Glob-T) ↑
> Ours-𝜌 25.46 0.8641 0.2458 -0.2795 0.0569 0.2875
> w/o P2P 29.79 0.9332 0.2326 -0.5131 0.0936 0.2779 w/o RD 25.27 0.8599 0.2430 –––w/o TPB (tr) 23.02 0.8072 0.2453 –––w/o TPB (inf) 17.64 0.5365 0.2510 –––

the existing carpet with wood flooring and generates scattered ar-tifacts rather than a coherent basket. FLUX.1-Kontext-dev, while producing high-quality textures, often diverges from the original scene structure, leading to hallucinations that alter the established layout (e.g., removing the carpet entirely). Similarly, despite its robustness, Nano Banana introduces subtle spatial shifts that nega-tively impact PSNR and SSIM scores (Tab. 1) and overlooks dynamic textual nuances; in the “Street” scene, it renders a static vehicle where the prompt specifies “a running car.” In contrast, our method leverages G-buffers to enforce strict spatial control and ensures precise semantic placement (e.g., keeping trees on the sidewalk), prevents texture bleeding like preserving the carpet, and accurately renders physical dynamics like motion blur, maintaining superior structural accuracy compared to the baselines. 

4.3.3 Subset G-buffer Editing. We compare our method with state-of-the-art G-buffer-to-RGB baselines: RGB ↔X [Zeng et al . 2024] and IntrinsicEdit [Lyu et al . 2025], as shown in Fig. 11. While these baselines capture basic albedo modifications, they exhibit significant limitations in preserving spatial consistency. RGB ↔X introduces noticeable artifacts (e.g., erroneous black regions in the window) despite receiving full G-buffer inputs. IntrinsicEdit, which relies on global prompt embeddings to represent unedited channels, lacks pixel-level spatial control; consequently, it fails to strictly adhere to unedited geometric constraints and ignores specific lighting instruc-tions, such as highlight removal. In contrast, our method leverages   

> ACM Trans. Graph., Vol. 11, No. 2, Article 33. Publication date: October 2024. 33:14 •Lu et al. Engine Render

Ours- -Full w/o TPB (train) w/o TPB (inference) w/o P2P Mask 

> Albedo Roughness Metallic Normal Depth Irradiance
> Progressive Photorealistic Generation
> Fig. 13. Visual ablation study of our PRR generation method. The generation proceeds progressively from top to bottom, where each row represents a generation stage building upon the result of the previous step and the corresponding G-buffer feature (shown on the left). We compare Ours-𝜌 -Full against variants without transition perception boost (TPB) during training/inference and without our P2P dataset (P2P). The "Mask" column visualizes the semantic injection regions at each stage.

a channel dropout strategy to achieve robust decoupled editing, ex-ecuting the user’s intent while preserving the integrity of unedited regions. To further demonstrate our precise control over illumination changes, we present a focused evaluation in Fig. 8. When the irradi-ance buffer is modified to alter shadow directions, our intermediate PBR result (Ours-𝜙 ) achieves high consistency to the ground-truth Engine Render, validating the physical accuracy of our generation. Crucially, the final PRR output (Ours-𝜌 ) maintains this modified irradiance while significantly enhancing material textures and at-mospheric realism and effectively generating photorealistic images. 

4.3.4 Realism Comparison with Graphics Engines. We evaluate our framework against standard graphics engines, including Mitsuba3 [Jakob et al . 2022], Blender [Blender Foundation [n. d.]], Falcor [Kallweit et al . 2022], and UE5 [Epic Games [n. d.]], as illustrated in Fig. 10. We also include extended photorealistic stylization results in Fig. 16, the details of which are discussed in the Appendix C . While these engines provide physically based foundations, their raw renders often exhibit an idealized synthetic appearance characteristic of pristine surfaces and simplified shading. Our method bridges this gap through our PRR process: in the Falcor “Street” scene (third row), the model introduces realistic weathering effects to building facades and enriches the sparse layout with vehicles and dynamic lighting; similarly, in the Blender “Burger” example (second row), it enhances material authenticity by adding organic details such as surface grease and steam. Quantitatively, this improvement is established by Tab. 3, where our method achieves superior aesthetic and realism scores (e.g., User Study, KID) compared to the baselines, confirming its capability to generate the authentic textures that standard rasterization typically omits. 

4.3.5 Realism Comparison with Real Photograph. To validate the vi-sual photorealism of our PRR framework, Fig. 12 presents the tranfer from raw geometric inputs to our photorealistic outputs, alongside real-world references for context. The raw images (middle row), ranging from standard engine renders to untextured photogram-metry meshes (e.g., the Colosseum and Milan Cathedral), typically exhibit strange surfaces, flat shading, and a lack of environmental life. In contrast, our method (top row) improves the perceptual pho-torealism by introducing natural atmospheric depth and granular texture details. It further refines the material appearance by gen-erating intricate surface features, such as road wear and building    

> ACM Trans. Graph., Vol. 11, No. 2, Article 33. Publication date: October 2024. GeRM: A Generative Rendering Model From Physically Realistic to Photorealistic •33:15 Albedo Normal Engine Render
> Prompt Attention (PA) Engine Render Albedo Normal

Convergence Steps with Progressive Realistic Prompt Convergence Steps with One Realistic Prompt Ours- 6                                      

> Ours-1Ours-2Ours-3
> Ours-4Ours-5
> Ours-7Ours-8Ours-9
> Ours-1Ours-2Ours-3
> Ours-1-PA Ours-2-PA Ours-3-PA
> Ours-4-PA Ours-5-PA Ours-6-PA
> Ours-7-PA Ours-8-PA Ours-9-PA
> Ours-1-Diff Ours-2-Diff Ours-3-Diff

Fig. 14. Convergence analysis: progressive and single realistic prompt. In the top panel, we illustrate our progressive generation strategy where VLM critiques the current image and provides revision suggestions that serve as input prompts for the next iteration. The “PA” columns display the corresponding CLIPSeg attention maps, showing how the model dynamically shifts its focus, with the attention regions gradually shrinking to specific details until convergence around Step 6. Furthermore, the bottom panel shows generation with a single static realistic prompt, where its target semantic region is visualized on the left (PA) and the “Diff” columns show the pixel-wise residuals between adjacent steps. As observed, the single prompt approach achieves immediate stability (residuals turn black rapidly) without risk of structural collapse, and our progressive strategy performs fine-grained optimization. The generated results stabilize with shrinking attention regions in the later steps, demonstrating that the model effectively converges to a high-quality photorealistic state around Step 6, consistent with our training iterations. 

textures, while populating the scene with contextually relevant ob-jects like pedestrians and vehicles. These enhancements produce a visual realism and richness that closely resembles the characteristics of the real-world references shown in the bottom row. 

4.4 Ablation Study 

We conducted ablation experiments on various components of the framework to validate their effectiveness. Further ablation studies are in Appendix A .

4.4.1 Design of Transition Perception Boost for Progressive Semantic Injection. We evaluated the importance of our incremental semantic-aware injection by removing it separately during the training and inference phases, as shown in the fourth and fifth columns of Fig. 13. During training, it functions as a spatial constraint that explicitly aligns the incremental changes between steps with the correspond-ing text prompts. Removing it disrupts this alignment, leading to visual inconsistencies. While the model retains some capacity to complete the image without this training constraint, omitting the strategy during inference results in a severe loss of spatial control. Specifically, the editing effects tend to drift uncontrollably, caus-ing modified areas to extend far beyond the region defined by the prompt-derived mask. Quantitatively, this loss of control is reflected in Table. 4, where the ‘w/o TPB’ settings exhibit a marked decline in PSNR and SSIM. This data confirms that without the incremental semantic injection strategy, the model fails to strictly preserve the unedited background, leading to lower accuracy scores. 

4.4.2 Design of Constructing Pairwise P2P Dataset. To validate our dataset construction, we trained a variant solely on the original synthetic data (Engine Render), excluding the P2P samples gener-ated by FLUX.1-Kontext-dev. Although this ablated model correctly adhered to text prompts and target regions, it produced only mar-ginal modifications without a significant improvement in realism, as shown in the last column of Fig. 13. As shown in Table. 4, the model trained without the pairwaise P2P dataset yields significantly lower aesthetic scores (e.g., CLIP-Global and KID), indicating that it remains stuck in the PBR domain. Thus, our P2P dataset acts as an indispensable bridge, effectively closing the domain gap between PBR G-buffers and PRR images. 

4.4.3 Editing Results on Separate G-Buffer Channels. In addition to changing the full set of G-buffers, our model supports flexible editing on partial channel subsets, a capability enabled by our ran-dom dropout strategy. This allows users to apply semantic masks to specific channels while preserving the integrity of others, as shown in Fig. 11. The ablation study reveals that excluding the dropout strategy (“Ours w/o RD”) leads to severe feature entanglement, as the model over-relies on channel correlations. For instance, modify-ing the quilt’s normal in the top panel unintentionally altered the albedo, while editing the albedo in the bottom panel triggered erro-neous changes in the window irradiance. Furthermore, the dropout strategy significantly enhances error-correction capabilities, such as smoothing out manual brush strokes during highlight removal in the first row of top panel. While “Ours w/o RD” retains visible arti-facts due to its sensitivity to input noise, our full model successfully   

> ACM Trans. Graph., Vol. 11, No. 2, Article 33. Publication date: October 2024. 33:16 •Lu et al.

refines the input to produce a clean result. This is quantitatively reflected in Table. 4, where the “w/o RD” configuration shows de-graded G-buffer consistency scores, confirming that random dropout is essential for learning robust, disentangled representations. 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 

> Generation Step
> 0.05
> 0.10
> 0.15
> 0.20
> 0.25
> 0.30
> Score / Intensity
> Convergence Analysis
> Semantic Attention Intensity
> CLIP Score
> KID Score
> 0.05
> 0.06
> 0.07
> 0.08
> 0.09
> KID

Fig. 15. Quantitative convergence analysis under the progressive iterative realistic prompt setting. We monitor the trajectories of Semantic Attention Intensity (blue), CLIP Score (green), and KID Score (red) across 12 generation steps. The vertical dotted line marks all metrics reach convergence at around step 6 ∼9. 

4.4.4 Convergence Analysis of PRR Steps. To justify our PRR process can reach convergence and validate the reliability of the convergence metric ( 𝐼 𝑘 ) introduced in Sec. 3.5, we analyze the P2P transfer under two settings, as established in Fig. 14 and Fig. 15. First, under the progressively iterative prompt setting (top three rows), our PRR results (Ours-𝜌𝑖 ) become visually stable after step 6, indicating that the incremental realism details are fully integrated. This visual convergence correlates perfectly with the quantitative metrics in Fig. 15: the Semantic Intensity ( 𝐼 𝑘 , blue line) shows a sharp decline, and the KID score (red dashed line) plateaus around Step 6, confirming that the PRR generation with iterative realistic prompts effectively can converge without over-editing. Second, in the single prompt setting (bottom rows), convergence is rapid. The pixel-wise difference maps (Diff) reveal that the primary transformation completes almost instantly in step 1, with subse-quent steps exhibiting only minor pixel-level oscillations. This sta-bility confirms that our method successfully prevents the structural collapse and noise accumulation typical of the FLUX.1-Kontext-dev backbone, ensuring precise editing without quality degradation. In summary, these results confirm the effectiveness of the 𝐼 𝑘 

metric and validate our convergence ability. Specifically, the ex-periments demonstrate that under iterative realistic prompts, our method converges stably to the PRR distribution without collapsing due to indefinite modification; furthermore, under a single prompt, it achieves the target distribution state in one step, effectively avoiding insufficient modification. 

5 Limitations and Future Work 

While our framework demonstrates significant progress in gener-ating photorealistic results from PBR inputs to PRR images, sev-eral limitations remain. First, inherited from the underlying dif-fusion properties, the stochastic nature of the generation process can occasionally lead to uncontrolled hallucinations or inconsistent transitions in fine-grained details that deviate from the physical constraints. Second, the precise generation and manipulation of complex optical phenomena such as intricate subsurface scattering or caustic lighting effects remain challenging. Third, as our method operates within image domain, it lacks a complete 3D scene repre-sentation, which limits its ability to reason about global structure and occlusion relationships. Despite these constraints, we believe our approach establishes a novel and effective route for high-quality photorealistic generation. Looking ahead, we aim to address these issues by incorporating explicit 3D structural priors as control con-ditions, which promises to enhance spatial perception and facilitate multi-frame consistency. Furthermore, we plan to extend this gen-erative rendering framework to dynamic scenes. 

6 Conclusion 

In this paper, we bridge the critical gap between physically-based rendering (PBR) and photorealistic rendering (PRR), denoted as the P2P gap. While PBR ensures mathematical correctness, it often lacks the rich realism of the real world due to simplified digital assets. To bridge this divide, we proposed GeRM, the first multi-modal genera-tive rendering model designed to unify physical accuracy with gener-ative photorealism. By formulating the P2P transition as a learnable distribution transfer vector (DTV) field, we bypass the need for an explicit realism metric for optimization. This approach was enabled by our construction of P2P-50K, an expert-guided pairwise dataset generated via a multi-agent VLM framework, which provides the necessary trajectory supervision in the absence of explicit metrics. Building on this foundation, we developed a multi-condition Con-trolNet to parameterize the vector field, enabling the progressive injection of photorealistic details under unified physical and seman-tic guidance. Furthermore, our novel transition perception boost for cross-modal alignment mechanism resolves the challenge of associating abstract textual prompts with specific physical regions, ensuring precise, controllable incremental updates. Extensive exper-iments across PBR synthesis, editing, and relighting demonstrate that GeRM effectively navigates the continuum between physical constraints and photorealism, establishing a new framework for controllable neural rendering. 

> ACM Trans. Graph., Vol. 11, No. 2, Article 33. Publication date: October 2024.

GeRM: A Generative Rendering Model From Physically Realistic to Photorealistic • 33:17 Winter Desolation Cyberpunk    

> Engine Render Medieval Maillard Mediterranean Dopamine G-buffers
> Engine Render
> Input G-buffers
> Input G-buffers

Ours-

Ours-

Fig. 16. PRR generation and stylization results. We present two scenes (Outdoor Cabin and Indoor Bedroom) rendered using Blender, where the upper row illustrates the progression from input G-buffers to the final photorealistic image, while the lower row displays stylized variations (e.g., Winter, Cyberpunk) built upon this PRR results. All outputs remain conditioned on the original G-buffers to ensure structural consistency. See the Appendix C for details. 

References 

Michael S Albergo and Eric Vanden-Eijnden. 2022. Building normalizing flows with stochastic interpolants. arXiv preprint arXiv:2209.15571 (2022). Hritik Bansal and Aditya Grover. 2023. Leaving reality to imagination: Robust classifi-cation via generated datasets. arXiv preprint arXiv:2302.02503 (2023). Sai Bi, Kalyan Sunkavalli, Federico Perazzi, Eli Shechtman, Vladimir G Kim, and Ravi Ramamoorthi. 2019. Deep cg2real: Synthetic-to-real translation via image disen-tanglement. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer Vision . 2730–2739. Mikołaj Bińkowski, Danica J Sutherland, Michael Arbel, and Arthur Gretton. 2018. Demystifying mmd gans. arXiv preprint arXiv:1801.01401 (2018). Blender Foundation. [n. d.]. Blender - a 3D modelling and rendering package. https: //www.blender.org/. Accessed: Sep. 29, 2024. Robert L Cook and Kenneth E. Torrance. 1982. A reflectance model for computer graphics. ACM Transactions on Graphics (ToG) 1, 1 (1982), 7–24. Marius Cordts, Mohamed Omran, Sebastian Ramos, Timo Rehfeld, Markus Enzweiler, Rodrigo Benenson, Uwe Franke, Stefan Roth, and Bernt Schiele. 2016. The cityscapes dataset for semantic urban scene understanding. In Proceedings of the IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern recognition . 3213–3223. Guillaume Couairon, Jakob Verbeek, Holger Schwenk, and Matthieu Cord. 2022. Diffedit: Diffusion-based semantic image editing with mask guidance. arXiv preprint arXiv:2210.11427 (2022). Matt Deitke, Dustin Schwenk, Jordi Salvador, Luca Weihs, Oscar Michel, Eli Vander-Bilt, Ludwig Schmidt, Kiana Ehsani, Aniruddha Kembhavi, and Ali Farhadi. 2022. Objaverse: A Universe of Annotated 3D Objects. arXiv preprint arXiv:2212.08051 

(2022). Prafulla Dhariwal and Alexander Nichol. 2021. Diffusion models beat gans on image synthesis. Advances in neural information processing systems 34 (2021), 8780–8794. Alara Dirik, Tuanfeng Wang, Duygu Ceylan, Stefanos Zafeiriou, and Anna Frühstück. 2025. PRISM: A Unified Framework for Photorealistic Reconstruction and Intrinsic Scene Modeling. arXiv preprint arXiv:2504.14219 (2025). Epic Games. [n. d.]. Unreal Engine. https://www.unrealengine.com/. Accessed: Sep. 29, 2024. Andreas Geiger, Philip Lenz, and Raquel Urtasun. 2012. Are we ready for autonomous driving? The KITTI vision benchmark suite. 2012 IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (2012), 3354–3361. https://api.semanticscholar.org/ CorpusID:6724907 Iliyan Georgiev, Jaroslav Křivánek, Tomáš Davidovič, and Philipp Slusallek. 2012. Light transport simulation with vertex connection and merging. ACM Trans. Graph. 31, 6, Article 192 (Nov. 2012), 10 pages. doi:10.1145/2366145.2366211 Peter Holderrieth and Ezra Erives. 2025. An Introduction to Flow Matching and Diffusion Models. arXiv:2506.02070 [cs.LG] https://arxiv.org/abs/2506.02070 Matthew Honnibal and Ines Montani. 2017. spaCy 2: Natural language understanding with Bloom embeddings, convolutional neural networks and incremental parsing. (2017). To appear. Wenzel Jakob, Sébastien Speierer, Nicolas Roussel, and Delio Vicini. 2022. Dr.Jit: A Just-In-Time Compiler for Differentiable Rendering. Transactions on Graphics (Pro-ceedings of SIGGRAPH) 41, 4 (July 2022). doi:10.1145/3528223.3530099 Henrik Wann Jensen. 1996. Global illumination using photon maps. In Proceedings of the Eurographics Workshop on Rendering Techniques ’96 (Porto, Portugal). Springer-Verlag, Berlin, Heidelberg, 21–30. James T Kajiya. 1986. The rendering equation. In Proceedings of the 13th annual conference on Computer graphics and interactive techniques . 143–150. Simon Kallweit, Petrik Clarberg, Craig Kolb, Tom’aš Davidovič, Kai-Hwa Yao, Theresa Foley, Yong He, Lifan Wu, Lucy Chen, Tomas Akenine-Möller, Chris Wyman, Cyril Crassin, and Nir Benty. 2022. The Falcor Rendering Framework. https://github. com/NVIDIAGameWorks/Falcor https://github.com/NVIDIAGameWorks/Falcor. Alexander Kirillov, Eric Mintun, Nikhila Ravi, Hanzi Mao, Chloe Rolland, Laura Gustafson, Tete Xiao, Spencer Whitehead, Alexander C. Berg, Wan-Yen Lo, Piotr Dollar, and Ross Girshick. 2023. Segment Anything. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer Vision (ICCV) . 4015–4026. Black Forest Labs. 2024. FLUX. https://github.com/black-forest-labs/flux. Black Forest Labs, Stephen Batifol, A. Blattmann, Frederic Boesel, Saksham Consul, Cyril Diagne, Tim Dockhorn, Jack English, Zion English, Patrick Esser, Sumith Kulal, Kyle Lacey, Yam Levi, Cheng Li, Dominik Lorenz, Jonas Muller, Dustin Podell, Robin Rombach, Harry Saini, Axel Sauer, and Luke Smith. 2025. FLUX.1 Kontext: Flow Matching for In-Context Image Generation and Editing in Latent Space. ArXiv 

abs/2506.15742 (2025). https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:279464475 Junnan Li, Dongxu Li, Caiming Xiong, and Steven Hoi. 2022. Blip: Bootstrapping language-image pre-training for unified vision-language understanding and genera-tion. In International conference on machine learning . PMLR, 12888–12900. ACM Trans. Graph., Vol. 11, No. 2, Article 33. Publication date: October 2024. 33:18 • Lu et al. 

Yixuan Li, Lihan Jiang, Linning Xu, Yuanbo Xiangli, Zhenzhi Wang, Dahua Lin, and Bo Dai. 2023. MatrixCity: A Large-scale City Dataset for City-scale Neural Rendering and Beyond. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer Vision . 3205–3215. Ruofan Liang, Zan Gojcic, Huan Ling, Jacob Munkberg, Jon Hasselgren, Zhi-Hao Lin, Jun Gao, Alexander Keller, Nandita Vijaykumar, Sanja Fidler, and Zian Wang. 2025. DiffusionRenderer: Neural Inverse and Forward Rendering with Video Diffusion Models. In The IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR) .Yaron Lipman, Ricky T. Q. Chen, Heli Ben-Hamu, Maximilian Nickel, and Matthew Le. 2023. Flow Matching for Generative Modeling. In The Eleventh International Confer-ence on Learning Representations . https://openreview.net/forum?id=PqvMRDCJT9t Xingchao Liu, Chengyue Gong, and Qiang Liu. 2022. Flow straight and fast: Learning to generate and transfer data with rectified flow. arXiv preprint arXiv:2209.03003 

(2022). Jiayuan Lu, Rengan Xie, Zixuan Xie, Zhizhen Wu, Dianbing Xi, Qi Ye, Rui Wang, Hujun Bao, and Yuchi Huo. 2025. IntrinsicControlNet: Cross-distribution Image Generation with Real and Unreal. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer Vision (ICCV) . 27315–27325. Timo Lüddecke and Alexander Ecker. 2022. Image segmentation using text and image prompts. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF conference on computer vision and pattern recognition . 7086–7096. Linjie Lyu, Valentin Deschaintre, Yannick Hold-Geoffroy, Miloš Hašan, Jae Shin Yoon, Thomas Leimküehler, Christian Theobalt, and Iliyan Georgiev. 2025. IntrinsicEdit: Precise generative image manipulation in intrinsic space. ACM Transactions on Graphics 44, 4 (2025). Nano Banana Team. 2025. Nano Banana: AI Image Editing. https://nano-banana.org. Accessed: 2025-10-01. Gerhard Neuhold, Tobias Ollmann, Samuel Rota Bulò, and Peter Kontschieder. 2017. The Mapillary Vistas Dataset for Semantic Understanding of Street Scenes. 2017 IEEE International Conference on Computer Vision (ICCV) (2017), 5000–5009. https: //api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:5753855 Maxime Oquab, Timothée Darcet, Théo Moutakanni, Huy Vo, Marc Szafraniec, Vasil Khalidov, Pierre Fernandez, Daniel Haziza, Francisco Massa, Alaaeldin El-Nouby, et al . 2023. Dinov2: Learning robust visual features without supervision. arXiv preprint arXiv:2304.07193 (2023). Taesung Park, Alexei A Efros, Richard Zhang, and Jun-Yan Zhu. 2020. Contrastive learn-ing for unpaired image-to-image translation. In European conference on computer vision . Springer, 319–345. Dustin Podell, Zion English, Kyle Lacey, Andreas Blattmann, Tim Dockhorn, Jonas Müller, Joe Penna, and Robin Rombach. 2024. SDXL: Improving Latent Diffusion Models for High-Resolution Image Synthesis. In The Twelfth International Conference on Learning Representations . https://openreview.net/forum?id=di52zR8xgf Alec Radford, Jong Wook Kim, Chris Hallacy, Aditya Ramesh, Gabriel Goh, Sandhini Agarwal, Girish Sastry, Amanda Askell, Pamela Mishkin, Jack Clark, et al . 2021. Learning transferable visual models from natural language supervision. In Interna-tional conference on machine learning . PmLR, 8748–8763. Stephan R. Richter, Hassan Abu AlHaija, and Vladlen Koltun. 2021a. Enhancing Photo-realism Enhancement. arXiv:2105.04619 [cs.CV] https://arxiv.org/abs/2105.04619 Stephan R. Richter, Hassan Abu AlHaija, and Vladlen Koltun. 2021b. Enhancing Photo-realism Enhancement. arXiv:2105.04619 (2021). Mike Roberts, Jason Ramapuram, Anurag Ranjan, Atulit Kumar, Miguel Angel Bautista, Nathan Paczan, Russ Webb, and Joshua M. Susskind. 2021. Hypersim: A Photore-alistic Synthetic Dataset for Holistic Indoor Scene Understanding. In International Conference on Computer Vision (ICCV) 2021 .Robin Rombach, Andreas Blattmann, Dominik Lorenz, Patrick Esser, and Björn Ommer. 2022. High-resolution image synthesis with latent diffusion models. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF conference on computer vision and pattern recognition . 10684–10695. Christoph Schuhmann, Romain Beaumont, Richard Vencu, Cade Gordon, Ross Wight-man, Mehdi Cherti, Theo Coombes, Aarush Katta, Clayton Mullis, Mitchell Worts-man, et al . 2022. Laion-5b: An open large-scale dataset for training next generation image-text models. Advances in neural information processing systems 35 (2022), 25278–25294. Eric Veach. 1998. Robust Monte Carlo methods for light transport simulation . Stanford University. Bruce Walter, Stephen R. Marschner, Hongsong Li, and Kenneth E. Torrance. 2007. Microfacet models for refraction through rough surfaces. In Proceedings of the 18th Eurographics Conference on Rendering Techniques (Grenoble, France) (EGSR’07) .Eurographics Association, Goslar, DEU, 195–206. Zhou Wang, A.C. Bovik, H.R. Sheikh, and E.P. Simoncelli. 2004. Image quality as-sessment: from error visibility to structural similarity. IEEE Transactions on Image Processing 13, 4 (2004), 600–612. doi:10.1109/TIP.2003.819861 Shaoan Xie, Zhifei Zhang, Zhe Lin, Tobias Hinz, and Kun Zhang. 2023. Smartbrush: Text and shape guided object inpainting with diffusion model. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF conference on computer vision and pattern recognition . 22428–22437. Jiazheng Xu, Xiao Liu, Yuchen Wu, Yuxuan Tong, Qinkai Li, Ming Ding, Jie Tang, and Yuxiao Dong. 2023. Imagereward: Learning and evaluating human preferences for text-to-image generation. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 36 (2023), 15903–15935. Yunchen Yu, Bruce Walter, Steve Marschner, and Andrea Weidlich. 2025. Realistic Cloth Rendering with a Ray-Wave Hybrid Shading Model. ACM Trans. Graph. 44, 6, Article 217 (Dec. 2025), 17 pages. doi:10.1145/3763359 Zheng Zeng, Valentin Deschaintre, Iliyan Georgiev, Yannick Hold-Geoffroy, Yiwei Hu, Fujun Luan, Ling-Qi Yan, and Miloš Hašan. 2024. RGB ↔ X: Image decomposi-tion and synthesis using material-and lighting-aware diffusion models. In ACM SIGGRAPH 2024 Conference Papers . 1–11. Richard Zhang, Phillip Isola, Alexei A Efros, Eli Shechtman, and Oliver Wang. 2018. The unreasonable effectiveness of deep features as a perceptual metric. In Proceedings of the IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern recognition . 586–595. Zechuan Zhang, Ji Xie, Yu Lu, Zongxin Yang, and Yi Yang. 2025. In-Context Edit: Enabling Instructional Image Editing with In-Context Generation in Large-Scale Dif-fusion Transformers. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS) .arXiv:2504.20690. Zhongtian Zheng, Tao Huang, Haozhe Su, Xueqi Ma, Yuefan Shen, Tongtong Wang, Yin Yang, Xifeng Gao, Zherong Pan, and Kui Wu. 2025. Auto Hair Card Extraction for Smooth Hair with Differentiable Rendering. ACM Trans. Graph. 44, 6, Article 238 (Dec. 2025), 13 pages. doi:10.1145/3763295 Bolei Zhou, Hang Zhao, Xavier Puig, Tete Xiao, Sanja Fidler, Adela Barriuso, and Antonio Torralba. 2019. Semantic understanding of scenes through the ade20k dataset. International Journal of Computer Vision 127, 3 (2019), 302–321. Jingsen Zhu, Yuchi Huo, Qi Ye, Fujun Luan, Jifan Li, Dianbing Xi, Lisha Wang, Rui Tang, Wei Hua, Hujun Bao, and Rui Wang. 2023. I 2-SDF: Intrinsic Indoor Scene Reconstruction and Editing via Raytracing in Neural SDFs. In CVPR .Jun-Yan Zhu, Taesung Park, Phillip Isola, and Alexei A Efros. 2017. Unpaired image-to-image translation using cycle-consistent adversarial networks. In Proceedings of the IEEE international conference on computer vision . 2223–2232. ACM Trans. Graph., Vol. 11, No. 2, Article 33. Publication date: October 2024.