Title: Utilizing Adversarial Training for Robust Voltage Control: An Adaptive Deep Reinforcement Learning Method

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2603.23648v1

Published Time: Thu, 26 Mar 2026 00:16:57 GMT

Number of Pages: 6

Markdown Content:
# Utilizing Adversarial Training for Robust Voltage Control: An Adaptive Deep Reinforcement Learning Method 

Sungjoo Chung, Ying Zhang 

School of Electrical and Computer Engineering Oklahoma State University 

Stillwater, U.S. 

{sungjoo.chung; y.zhang }@okstate.edu 

Abstract —Adversarial training is a defense method that trains machine learning models on intentionally perturbed attack in-puts, so they learn to be robust against adversarial examples. This paper develops a robust voltage control framework for distribution networks with high penetration of distributed energy resources (DERs). Conventional voltage control methods are vulnerable to strategic cyber attacks, as they typically consider only random or black-box perturbations. To address this, we formulate white-box adversarial attacks using Projected Gradient Descent (PGD) and train a deep reinforcement learning (DRL) agent adversarially. The resulting policy adapts in real time to high-impact, strategically optimized perturbations. Simulations on DER-rich networks show that the approach maintains voltage stability and operational efficiency under realistic attack scenar-ios, highlighting the effectiveness of gradient-based adversarial DRL in enhancing robustness and adaptability in modern distri-bution system control. 

Index Terms —Cyber attack, voltage control, deep reinforce-ment learning, adversarial training. 

I. I NTRODUCTION 

Driven by the pursuit of energy efficiency and environmental sustainability, distributed energy resources (DERs) are being increasingly integrated into distribution networks [1]. Lever-aging the potential of DERs to enhance grid reliability and flexibility requires secure and dependable coordination among control devices, communication infrastructure, and control centers. However, the extensive data exchange, both among field devices and between these devices and control centers, introduces significant cybersecurity vulnerabilities [2]. These vulnerabilities can compromise the effectiveness of coordina-tion strategies implemented by distribution management sys-tems (DMSs), such as Volt-Var optimization (VVO), ultimately resulting in degraded reliability and operational efficiency of the distribution network. VVO represents a core operational function of modern DMS, aiming to improve network operational efficiency and minimize reactive power losses by computing optimal con-trol set-points for voltage-regulating devices, such as smart inverters (SIs), capacitor banks (CBs), on-load tap changers (OLTCs), and battery energy storage systems (BESSs) [3]. As VVO algorithms are critically dependent on accurate network state estimation, ensuring the integrity and security of measurement data and communication channels is essential. Consequently, robust cybersecurity mechanisms are imperative to safeguard the reliability and effectiveness of VVO deploy-ment in distribution systems. Motivated by these cybersecurity challenges, recent research has increasingly focused on enhancing the robustness of volt-age control mechanisms under adversarial conditions. In [4], a detection framework based on spatiotemporal consistency checks is developed to identify falsified voltage measurements in power systems with high photovoltaic (PV) penetration. A game-theoretic framework is presented in [5] to model the strategic interaction between an attacker injecting stealthy data and an operator defending an integrated Volt-Var control (VVC) system. A centralized VVO strategy is proposed in [6], which computes reliable control set-points using historical and forecasted data and activates a Local Setting Solution under compromised conditions. In contrast to centralized and model-driven architectures, a fully autonomous VVC scheme is proposed in [7] for DER-rich distribution networks, coordi-nating both static and dynamic reactive power control modes independently of external communication infrastructure. While these contributions have collectively advanced the state of secure voltage control, key limitations remain. Many existing strategies rely on fixed rules or pre-defined operating regimes, limiting adaptability to evolving attack strategies and dynamic grid conditions. Moreover, scalability and real-time respon-siveness remain challenging in large, heterogeneous, and DER-rich distribution networks. In response to these limitations, deep reinforcement learning (DRL) has emerged as a promising paradigm for enabling adaptive, scalable, and model-free robust voltage control in dynamic and uncertain distribution networks. An improved soft actor-critic (SAC) defense algorithm is developed in [8], incorporating auto-tuned entropy, Gaussian policy modeling, and action prioritization, enabling the agent to allocate DER set points and load-shedding decisions robustly under cyber attacks. A robust attention-enhanced SAC method is proposed in [9] for coordinated PV inverter control. The agent-level attention mechanism dynamically identifies the most influ-ential agents for VVC, while a regularizer constrains the 

> arXiv:2603.23648v1 [eess.SY] 24 Mar 2026

divergence between nominal and perturbed action distributions to enhance adversarial robustness. A robust deep deterministic policy gradient (R-DDPG) algorithm is proposed in [10], which integrates a min-max adversarial training framework to enhance resilience against adversarial perturbations. By incorporating prediction interval-based adversarial states that capture PV generation and load uncertainties, the agent learns robust policies under worst-case operating scenarios. In [11], a proximal policy optimization (PPO)-based DRL approach is developed to mitigate cyber attacks that manipulate DER Volt/Var and Volt/Watt setpoints, inducing voltage deviations across the network. The method coordinates uncompromised DERs by deploying an agent trained adaptively to adjust local droop parameters, thereby restoring voltage balance under adversarial conditions. In [12], a twin delayed deep deterministic (TD3) DRL method is developed to model least effort attacks, which identify the minimum droop-gain perturbations required to destabilize the system, in inverter-based microgrids. A robust dynamic defense strategy is then generated through an adversarial DRL framework, in which the attacker and defender are formulated as adversarial Markov decision processes. Despite these advances in DRL-based robust voltage control methods, existing research exhibits two key limitations. First, most studies evaluate robustness using randomly injected perturbations, ignoring system vulnerabilities and agent sen-sitivities. Such attacks lack strategic intent and fail to capture targeted adversarial behaviors that exploit grid dynamics or agent weaknesses. Second, prior research primarily focuses on black-box attacks, where the adversary has no knowledge of the control policy. In practice, white-box attacks, in which the attacker has full access to the DRL agent’s policy and gradient information, can be far more detrimental, enabling targeted, high-impact manipulations of system states and con-trol actions. To address these gaps, this paper proposes a novel adver-sarial training framework for DRL-based VVO. Adversarial training using Projected Gradient Descent (PGD) is utilized to enable the agent to learn robust policies to high-impact, directionally optimized perturbations. As PGD is considered the strongest first-order adversary [13], DRL agents trained against PGD-generated perturbations also exhibit strong ro-bustness to weaker first-order attacks such as the fast gradient signed method (FGSM) [14], highlighting the effectiveness of gradient-based adversarial training in improving general robustness. II. P ROBLEM FORMULATION 

A. Power System Modeling for Distribution Networks 

Let the distribution network be represented by a graph G =(N , E), where N denotes the set of buses and E denotes the set of branches. The complex voltages of all the buses in the distribution network, denoted by Ui ∈ C and i ∈ N , are obtained by solving the nonlinear AC power flow equations, expressed as 

P Gi − P Li = |Ui| X

> j∈N

|Uj | (Gij cos θij + Bij sin θij ) (1) 

QGi − QLi = |Ui| X

> j∈N

|Uj | (Gij sin θij − Bij cos θij ) . (2) In (1) and (2), P Gi and QGi denote the generated active and reactive power, and P Li and QLi are the active and reactive load at bus i, respectively; Gij and Bij are the conductance and susceptance, and θij is the voltage phase difference between buses i and j, respectively. Four types of voltage regulating devices are considered: smart inverters (SIs), CBs, OLTCs, and BESSs. For SIs, it is assumed that they operate under the reactive power control mode, and the active power output of the distributed generations (DGs) is known. Then, the injected or absorbed reactive power of the SI on bus i can be expressed as 

QDG,i ≤ QDG,i ≤ QDG,i (3) 

QDG,i =

q

(SDG,i )2 − (PDG,i )2. (4) In (3) and (4), QDG,i and QDG,i denote the maximum and minimum available reactive power based on the DG’s apparent power SDG,i and active power PDG,i . The control action of an SI on bus i is defined as aDG,i ∈ [−1, 1] , and QDG,i =

aDG,i QDG,i . To facilitate the efficient and flexible training of DRL algorithms, the action space of SIs is discretized within its range with a step size of 0.1 [15]. The CBs are modeled as follows: 

QCB,i = aCB,i (Ui)Bi. (5) In (5), Bi denotes the susceptance of bus i and aCB,i ∈ { 0, 1}

denotes the control action of CB on bus i, indicating the off/on status. The OLTCs are modeled as discrete voltage regulators with a regulating range of ±10% with 32 steps, expressed as 

UV R,i = 1 p.u . + aV R,i ∆UV R . (6) In (6), aV R,i ∈ {− 16 , −15 , . . . , 16 } denotes the control action and the step for the regulator on bus i, and ∆UV R = 0 .00625 

p.u. denotes the step size. The BESS at bus i is modeled as a controllable active power source with state of charge (SoC) σi. Its SoC evolves according to 

σ′ 

> i

= σi + P bat  

> i

∆tEi

. (7) In (7), ∆t denotes the time step and Ei denotes the battery capacity. The SoC is constrained within operational limits 

σmin ,i ≤ σ′ 

> i

≤ σmax ,i . (8) The BESS control action, abat ,i ∈ [−1, 1] , determines the injected or absorbed power, where negative values indicate charging and positive values indicate discharging, as follows: 

P bat  

> i

= abat ,i P bat max ,i . (9) For DRL implementation, the continuous action is discretized into 33 levels to ensure fine-grained control while keeping the action space tractable, as follows: 

abat ,i ∈ {− 1, −1 + d, . . . , 0, . . . , 1 − d, 1} d = 0 .0625 .

(10) The objective of VVO is to regulate the bus voltage magni-tudes within the standard operational range while minimizing total active power losses in the network. By solving (1) and (2), the total active power loss in the system can be obtained by 

Ploss = X

> (i,j )∈E

Re U ⊤ 

> ij

Iij . (11) In (11), Uij denotes the voltage drop across the branch (i, j ),and Iij denotes the corresponding line current obtained from the branch impedance. The VVO problem can be formulated as an optimization problem with the following objective function: 

a = arg min CpPloss + Cv

X

> i∈N

 |Ui| − 1 p.u. 2

s.t. power flow equations (1) , (2) ,

device constraints (3) − (10) .

(12) In (12), Cp and Cv denote the cost coefficients of power loss and voltage violation. While (12) only accounts for a single time step, in practice, sequential time-varying operating conditions are applied to the distribution network, which produces a sequence of VVO problems to be solved by the DRL algorithm. 

B. Markov Decision Process 

The VVO problem is formulated as a Markov Decision Process (MDP) defined by the tuple (S, A, p, R) and over a finite horizon H = 24 , corresponding to one control action per hour in a 24 -hour daily cycle. The state space S is represented as 

st = |Ut|, σt−1BESS , at−1VR , at−1CB , at−1DG 

. (13) In (13), |U| denotes the vector of bus voltage magnitudes, 

σBESS denotes the battery states of charge, and aVR , aCB , and 

aDG denote the discrete control actions of OLTCs, capacitor banks, and smart inverters, respectively. The action space A

comprises setpoints for all controllable devices, denoted by the action vector at ∈ A .The transition probability p(st+1 | st, at) : S × S × A → 

[0 , 1) represents the probability of reaching the next state 

st+1 ∈ S ′ from the current state st ∈ S under action at.Transitions are governed by the AC power flow equations (1)– (2) and device dynamics, and are therefore deterministic given the current state and action, except for stochastic variations in load and renewable generation. The reward function is designed to align with the VVO objective described in (12), integrating power loss minimiza-tion, voltage regulation, and device operation penalties into a unified scalar signal for reinforcement learning. Following the formulation in [16], the reward at each step is expressed as 

r(st, s t+1 , t ) = − fvolt (st+1 ) − fctrl (st, s t+1 , t )

− fpower (st+1 ). (14) In (14), st and st+1 denote the system states before and after applying action at at time step t. The three penalty components respectively represent voltage deviation from nominal limits, control operation costs associated with invert-ers, capacitors, regulators, and batteries, and normalized total power loss. This formulation encourages the agent to maintain voltage profiles within acceptable bounds while minimizing active power losses and avoiding excessive device switching. Further implementation details of each component follow the definitions provided in [16]. Having defined the VVO problem as an MDP with states, actions, and rewards, a Double Deep Q-Network (DDQN) agent is employed to solve it. DDQN is selected because the VVC actions in PowerGym are inherently discrete, for which Q-learning methods are well-suited. Moreover, DDQN mitigates the overestimation bias present in standard DQN, providing improved training stability and more reliable value estimates in large combinatorial action spaces. The agent interacts with the environment by observing the current state 

st, selecting an action at, receiving the reward rt, and updating the state-action value estimates Q(st, at) via the DDQN framework. III. P ROPOSED ADVERSARIAL TRAINING FOR ROBUST 

VOLTAGE CONTROL 

DRL-based voltage control methods achieve effective real-time voltage regulation and loss minimization. However, they are highly vulnerable to cyberattacks, measurement errors, and extreme operating conditions. Such cyber-physical threats necessitate the development of a robust learning framework that enhances the resilience of DRL agents under these risks. To this end, this section proposes using adversarial training, a defense method that exposes the agent to intentionally perturbed states during learning to improve robustness against adversarial inputs in real-world operation. 

A. Adversarial State Markov Decision Process 

The VVO problem under adversarial observation is cast as an Adversarial State Markov Decision Process (ASMDP), extending the standard MDP described in Section II-B to account for perturbed states. For each true state s ∈ S,let Ξ( s) ⊂ S denote the family of admissible adversarial states the adversary may generate. The set Ξ( s) constrains the adversary’s power, typically via an ℓ2 or ℓ∞ norm bound on the perturbation. Then, the ASMDP can be represented by the tuple (S, A, Ξ, r, p ).Under an adversary that presents sadv ∈ Ξ( s) to the agent, policy evaluation follows modified Bellman updates, which, Algorithm 1 Offline Adversarial Training with PGD for DDQN-Based Voltage Control  

> 1:

Input: Replay buffer D, Q-network Qθ , target network 

Qθ− , perturbation radius δ, PGD step size α, PGD steps 

K, episode attack probability pattack , attack start episode 

Eattack  

> 2:

Initialize: Qθ randomly; periodically update Qθ− ← Qθ 

> 3:

for each training episode do  

> 4:

for each training iteration within the episode do  

> 5:

Sample minibatch {(s, a, r, s ′)} from D 

> 6:

if episode ≥ Eattack , with probability pattack then  

> 7:

Generate adversarial next state s′ 

> adv

using K PGD steps within an ℓ∞ ball of radius δ 

> 8:

else  

> 9:

Set s′ 

> adv

← s′ 

> 10:

end if  

> 11:

Select action a via ϵ-greedy on current state s 

> 12:

Store (s, a, r, s ′

> adv

) in D 

> 13:

Update Qθ by minimizing DDQN loss using Qθ− 

> 14:

Periodically update target network: Qθ− ← Qθ 

> 15:

end for  

> 16:

end for 

for a DDQN agent, can be expressed as the following: 

˜Q(s, a ) = r(s, a, s ′) + γ ˜Q



s′

> adv

, arg max  

> a′

Q(s′

> adv

, a ′)



.

(15) In (15), ˜Q(s, a ) denotes the Q-value under adversarially per-turbed states, s′ 

> adv

∈ Ξ( s′) denotes the perturbed next state after the environment transition, and γ ∈ [0 , 1] denotes the discount factor. The target network provides a stable estimate of the maximal Q-value. This formulation ensures that the DDQN agent learns value functions and policies robust to adversarial perturbations while retaining the original MDP dynamics and reward structure. 

B. Gradient-Based Adversarial Attacks 

Adversarial attacks are modeled as additive perturbations η

applied to the state s, resulting in a perturbed observation 

sadv = s + η. (16) In (16), η is constrained by an ℓ∞ norm such that ∥η∥∞ ≤ δ.This formulation allows us to consider a range of first-order gradient-based attacks under a unified norm bound. Among first-order attacks, the Fast Gradient Sign Method (FGSM) perturbs the state along the sign of the gradient of a loss function as follows [14]: 

ηFGSM = δ · sign (∇sJ(s, π target )) . (17) In (17), δ denotes the maximum allowable perturbation mag-nitude, and J(s, π target ) denotes a surrogate loss function used to generate adversarial perturbations to measure the discrepancy between the current policy of the agent π and a target distribution πtarget . Here, πtarget is a hypothetical target policy constructed to emphasize the worst-case action TABLE I: DDQN AND ADVERSARIAL ATTACK HYPERPA -                      

> RAMETERS DDQN Parameters Hidden layers, units, activation 4, 512 each, ReLU Optimizer, learning rate, γAdam, 5×10 −5, 0.995 Target network update frequency 2000 steps Replay buffer size, mini-batch size 100,000, 512 Exploration policy ϵ-greedy Initial, final ϵ,ϵ-decay 1.0, 0.01, 0.9995 Total episodes 9,000 Shared Attack Parameters (PGD & FGSM) Attack injection episode Eattack 1000 Attack scope Voltage magnitude |U|
> Attack probability per episode pattack 0.5 PGD Attack Parameters Step size ( α), Max. perturbation ( δ)0.0125, 0.1 Number of iterations, random start 20, Yes FGSM Attack Parameters Max. perturbation ( δ)0.1

aworst = arg min a∈A Q(s, a ), which is the action that mini-mizes the Q-value at the current state. The target policy is used solely to define the loss for FGSM perturbation generation and is not used in actual DDQN value updates or action selection. To generate stronger and more universal perturbations, Pro-jected Gradient Descent (PGD) is utilized. PGD iteratively applies gradient-based updates while projecting the candidate states back onto the ℓ∞ ball of radius δ around the original state. Specifically, the PGD update is expressed as 

s(k+1) = Π B∞(s,δ )



s(k) + α · sign (∇sJ(s(k), π target )) 



.

(18) In (18), s(k) denotes the candidate adversarial state at iteration 

k, where k = 0 , 1, . . . , K −1 with K being the total number of PGD iterations; α denotes the PGD step size and ΠB∞(s,δ )(·)

denotes the projection operator that ensures the perturbation remains within the ℓ∞ norm bound. PGD is considered a “universal” first-order adversary, providing robustness not only against itself but also against weaker gradient-based attacks like FGSM [13]. These perturbations define the set Ξ( s) in the ASMDP formulation in Section III-A, representing the family of admissible adversarial states the agent may encounter during training. 

C. Adversarial Training 

Adversarial training exposes the agent to worst-case PGD-perturbed states to enhance robustness against targeted cy-berattacks. By probabilistically replacing nominal next states with PGD-generated adversarial states during DDQN updates, the agent learns value estimates and policies that maintain voltage regulation and minimize system losses under adver-sarial perturbations. Algorithm 1 illustrates this procedure and its integration within the standard offline DDQN training framework. Hyperparameters δ, α, K, and attack probability 

pattack are selected to reflect realistic bounds on adversarial perturbations, balancing robustness and training efficiency. During training, the experience tuple (s, a, r, s ′

> adv

) is stored in the replay buffer, and Q-network parameters are updated TABLE II: E FFECTIVENESS COMPARISON OF FGSM  

> AND

PGD M ETHODS Metric Clean FGSM PGD Reward -7.11 -23.34 -19.96 Q-value reduction – 0.93 1.88 Total voltage violations 650 3000 5437 Avg. voltage violations/timestep 0.54 2.50 4.53 % at Max. δ (magnitude) – 92.1 43.9 

using the following DDQN loss: 

L(θ) = E(s,a,r,s ′ 

> adv )

h r + γ max  

> a′

Q(s′

> adv

, a ′; θ−)

− Q(s, a ; θ)2i

. (19) In (19), θ− and γ denote the target network and the discount factor, respectively. To prevent adversarial overfitting and instability observed when strong perturbations are introduced too early in training, PGD attacks are applied only with probability pattack and only after the agent has formed a stable baseline policy (e.g., episode ≥ Eattack ). This scheduling ensures that the agent first learns the nominal system dynamics before gradually learning to counter adversarial perturbations. By probabilistically incorporating PGD perturbations, the agent learns policies that are robust to adversarial attacks while maintaining nominal performance. This systematically strengthens the policy against input manipulations, aligning with a robust control perspective where adversarial pertur-bations represent worst-case deviations in observed states. Although PGD adversarial training increases computational cost and may slightly slow convergence, our case studies demonstrate that it significantly improves robustness, as PGD generates stronger adversarial perturbations than FGSM and effectively trains the agent against worst-case attacks. IV. C ASE STUDY 

The proposed robust control method is tested on the IEEE 123-bus distribution network to validate its effectiveness. A total of 15 baseline load profiles, provided by Powergym [16], is utilized and split into 10 for training, 2 for evaluation, and 3

for testing. The baseline load profiles are perturbed between 

80 − 120% uniformly to generate diverse system loading scenarios. Twenty photovoltaic systems, interfaced with the grid through SIs, are installed on buses 7, 12, 18, 22, 25, 37, 44, 52, 64, 77, 81, 85, 90, 91, 92, 100, 103, 106, 111, and 116. In addition, CBs, OLTCs, and BESSs are installed on buses and branches as defined in the Powergym environment. Each simulation episode consists of 24 time steps. Table I summarizes the DDQN training parameters and adversarial attack settings used in this study. Three models are trained: a baseline model without adversarial attacks, a model trained with FGSM-based attacks, and a model trained with PGD-based attacks. Perturbation magnitude ( δ = 0 .1)is chosen to challenge the agent without causing unrealistic states. Step size and number of iterations are chosen to ensure that the boundary of the δ-ball can be reached from any starting point within it [13]. TABLE III: C ROSS -A TTACK PERFORMANCE OF ROBUSTLY 

TRAINED DDQN A GENTS Train Attack Test Attack Reward Volt. Viol. (Total) Total Switches (per timestep) Clean Attack FGSM FGSM -6.88 -9.43 0 7.58 PGD -10.35 257 7.18 PGD FGSM -6.73 -9.16 0 8.69 PGD -8.49 0 6.24 

A. Effectiveness of Adversarial Attacks on Naively Trained Models 

Table II summarizes the impact of FGSM and PGD attacks on a standard, non-robust DDQN agent on the test dataset over 50 episodes. The attack parameters are kept the same as during the training to ensure a fair comparison. For clarity, we define the metrics reported in the table. Reward is the mean episodic value across all episodes. Q-value reduction measures the average decrease in action value at each attack timestep. Voltage violations are counted per timestep if bus voltages exceed ±5% of nominal ( 1.0 p.u.), and the % at maximum δ indicates how many perturbed measurements reach the maximum allowed magnitude. Both gradient-based methods cause significant degradation, with the FGSM and PGD methods producing a 228% and 

181% drop in mean reward compared to the clean baseline, respectively. The Q-value reduction provides insight into how much the attack degrades the estimated value of the actions chosen by the agent, quantifying how severely the perturba-tions distort the learned value landscape. PGD causes a near two-fold larger reduction than the FGSM method, reflecting the effectiveness of its iterative optimization at steering the agent toward low-value regions of the state space. This effec-tiveness directly transfers to the number of voltage violations. Although FGSM produces a larger degradation in mean reward, the PGD attack generates substantially more voltage violations. This difference arises from the nature of the attacks. FGSM applies a single-step attack in which more than 92% 

of the perturbed voltage measurements reach the maximum allowed magnitude. PGD, however, uses multiple gradient-based refinements within each attack timestep and produces perturbations that reduce Q-values more effectively, even though the perturbation magnitude is less than half of that used by FGSM. This suggests that PGD updates are better aligned with the agent’s value function, steering the policy toward actions that ultimately yield more unsafe voltage profiles over time. 

B. Adversarial Training and Robustness Evaluation 

Fig. 1 illustrates the episode reward curves during training for clean-, FGSM-, and PGD-trained DDQN agents. Surprisingly, the clean-trained agent exhibits slower learning and achieves the lowest episodic reward, suggesting that training solely on nominal states limits exposure to challenging operating conditions. In contrast, adversarial training with FGSM or PGD not only improves robustness but also enhances explo-ration, guiding the agent to learn policies that generalize more effectively across the full state space. Table III summarizes the cross-attack performance of Fig. 1: Episode reward curves during training for clean-, FGSM-, and PGD-trained DDQN agents 

DDQN agents robustly trained against either FGSM or PGD attacks. Each model was evaluated on the test dataset for 50 

episodes under clean conditions and under both FGSM and PGD attacks to assess robustness generalization across attack types. When subjected to cross-type attacks, the PGD-trained agent effectively mitigates voltage violations while performing approximately 40% more switches per timestep under cross-type attacks. In contrast, the FGSM-trained agent makes 5% 

fewer switches per timestep under cross-type attacks, failing to compensate for the stronger perturbations. The Q-value reduc-tions further indicate that PGD-trained agents preserve their estimated action values roughly two times more effectively than FGSM-trained agents under cross-attacks, highlighting a marked improvement in policy stability. These findings are further reinforced by Fig. 2, in which the FGSM-trained model exhibits a substantial increase in voltage range and number of voltage violations when subject to PGD attacks. Collectively, these observations demonstrate that PGD-based adversarial training not only sustains reward performance but also substantially enhances robustness and ensures constraint satisfaction in previously unseen attack scenarios. V. C ONCLUSION 

This paper develops a DRL-based voltage control framework that leverages PGD-based adversarial training to enhance robustness against strategic cyber attacks. By exposing the agent to high-impact, directionally optimized perturbations, the trained policy maintains voltage stability and opera-tional efficiency under realistic attack scenarios. Simulations show that PGD-trained agents also generalize well to weaker gradient-based attacks such as FGSM, highlighting the effec-tiveness of gradient-based adversarial training in improving resilience and adaptability in DER-rich distribution networks. REFERENCES [1] R. Detchon and R. Van Leeuwen, “Policy: Bring sustainable energy to the developing world,” Nature , vol. 508, no. 7496, p. 309–311, Apr 2014. [2] N. Tatipatri and S. L. Arun, “A comprehensive review on cyber-attacks in power systems: Impact analysis, detection, and cyber security,” IEEE Access , vol. 12, pp. 18 147–18 167, 2024. [3] S. Satsangi and G. Kumbhar, “Review on volt/var optimization and control in electric distribution system,” in 2016 IEEE 1st International Conference on Power Electronics, Intelligent Control and Energy Sys-tems (ICPEICES) , 2016, pp. 1–6. [4] Y. Isozaki, S. Yoshizawa, Y. Fujimoto, H. Ishii, I. Ono, T. Onoda, and Y. Hayashi, “Detection of cyber attacks against voltage control in distribution power grids with pvs,” IEEE Transactions on Smart Grid ,vol. 7, no. 4, pp. 1824–1835, 2016. 

(a) FGSM attack 

(b) PGD attack 

Fig. 2: Voltage profiles under different adversarial attacks. Shaded regions indicate the minimum–maximum voltage envelope across all episodes, solid curves represent the mean voltage, and horizontal red lines denote the operational limits (0.95–1.05 p.u.). 

[5] A. Teixeira, G. D´ an, H. Sandberg, R. Berthier, R. B. Bobba, and A. Valdes, “Security of smart distribution grids: Data integrity attacks on integrated volt/var control and countermeasures,” in 2014 American Control Conference , 2014, pp. 4372–4378. [6] A. Majumdar, Y. P. Agalgaonkar, B. C. Pal, and R. Gottschalg, “Cen-tralized volt–var optimization strategy considering malicious attack on distributed energy resources control,” IEEE Transactions on Sustainable Energy , vol. 9, no. 1, pp. 148–156, 2018. [7] A. Joseph, K. Smedley, and S. Mehraeen, “Secure high der penetration power distribution via autonomously coordinated volt/var control,” IEEE Transactions on Power Delivery , vol. 35, no. 5, pp. 2272–2284, 2020. [8] A. Selim, J. Zhao, F. Ding, F. Miao, and S.-Y. Park, “Adaptive deep reinforcement learning algorithm for distribution system cyber attack defense with high penetration of ders,” IEEE Transactions on Smart Grid , vol. 15, no. 4, pp. 4077–4089, 2024. [9] X. Yang, H. Liu, and W. Wu, “Attention-enhanced multi-agent reinforce-ment learning against observation perturbations for distributed volt-var control,” IEEE Transactions on Smart Grid , vol. 15, no. 6, pp. 5761– 5772, 2024. [10] Z. Chen, S. Cai, and A. P. S. Meliopoulos, “Robust deep reinforcement learning for volt-var optimization in active distribution system under uncertainty,” IEEE Transactions on Smart Grid , vol. 16, no. 6, pp. 4463– 4474, 2025. [11] C. Roberts, S.-T. Ngo, A. Milesi, A. Scaglione, S. Peisert, and D. Arnold, “Deep reinforcement learning for mitigating cyber-physical der voltage unbalance attacks,” in 2021 American Control Conference (ACC) , 2021, pp. 2861–2867. [12] Y. Wang and B. C. Pal, “Destabilizing attack and robust defense for inverter-based microgrids by adversarial deep reinforcement learning,” 

IEEE Transactions on Smart Grid , vol. 14, no. 6, pp. 4839–4850, 2023. [13] A. Madry, A. Makelov, L. Schmidt, D. Tsipras, and A. Vladu, “Towards deep learning models resistant to adversarial attacks,” 2019. [Online]. Available: https://arxiv.org/abs/1706.06083 [14] I. J. Goodfellow, J. Shlens, and C. Szegedy, “Explaining and harnessing adversarial examples,” 2015. [Online]. Available: https: //arxiv.org/abs/1412.6572 [15] Y. Zhang, X. Wang, J. Wang, and Y. Zhang, “Deep reinforcement learning based volt-var optimization in smart distribution systems,” IEEE Transactions on Smart Grid , vol. 12, no. 1, pp. 361–371, 2021. [16] T.-H. Fan, X. Y. Lee, and Y. Wang, “Powergym: A reinforcement learning environment for volt-var control in power distribution systems,” 2022. [Online]. Available: https://arxiv.org/abs/2109.03970