Title: DivRL: Disentangled Self-Similarity Rewards for Diverse Subject-Driven Generation

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2606.23950v1

Published Time: Wed, 24 Jun 2026 00:15:10 GMT

Number of Pages: 24

Markdown Content:
# DivRL: Disentangled Self-Similarity Rewards for Diverse Subject-Driven Generation 

Qian Wang, Zhenyu Li, Abdelrahman Eldesokey, and Peter Wonka 

KAUST, Saudi Arabia 

{first.last}@kaust.edu.sa Flux -Kontext  Ours          

> Structural diversity
> “… playing with
> the butterfly” Repeated viewpoints and expressions Diverse poses, viewpoints and expressions
> “… smiling at a
> press conference ”
> “… painting stars in
> the night sky, each
> brushstroke releasing
> real twinkling stars ”
> Ours Flux -Kontext
> “… set up on an old
> wooden desk with
> books around it ”
> “Ink sketch …”
> PaCO -RL Ours
> Prompt following Identity preservatio n
> Incorrect
> prompt
> interaction
> Accurate
> prompt
> alignment
> Identity
> drift
> Identity
> preservatio n

Fig. 1: Our method achieves a better balance between structural diversity, prompt following, and identity consistency compared with strong baselines. 

Abstract. Subject-driven image generation faces an “Identity-Diversity Paradox”, where strong identity preservation often leads to rigid and low-diversity outputs. We propose a post-training framework called DivRL 

that jointly optimizes identity consistency and structural diversity simul-taneously by leveraging disentangled visual features from a robust sim-ilarity model. Specifically, we introduce a Negative Self-Similarity Mea-sure (nSSM) to quantify structural diversity, and Visual Semantic Match-ing (VSM) to evaluate identity consistency. We propose an “Explore-and-Suppress” strategy that treats VSM as a gated constraint: the model freely explores structurally diverse configurations, and only samples that violate the identity threshold are penalized via a quadratic hinge loss. This converts identity preservation from a competing objective into a feasibility constraint, allowing nSSM and VSM to improve jointly. Exper-iments demonstrate that our method effectively pushes the model to gen-        

> arXiv:2606.23950v1 [cs.CV] 22 Jun 2026 2Q. Wang et al. erate both consistent and diverse images and improves structural diver-sity while maintaining comparable identity consistency through a gated optimization formulation. Code is available at https://github.com/QianWangX/DivRL.
> Keywords: Subject-driven Image Generation ·Diffusion Models ·Re-inforcement Learning ·GRPO

1 Introduction 

Subject-driven image generation aims to synthesize novel images of a specific subject while preserving its visual identity under diverse contexts, poses, and styles. Recent diffusion-based models have demonstrated remarkable fidelity in reproducing reference subjects, enabling applications such as personalized im-age generation and identity-preserving editing [13, 33, 34, 38]. However, these models often struggle to balance identity consistency with structural diversity, while adhering to the textual prompt as illustrated in 1. Models that strongly enforce identity preservation frequently collapse to near-duplicate images of the reference, producing outputs with similar poses, viewpoints, or expressions. Con-versely, methods that encourage diversity often drift away from the subject iden-tity. This tension between preserving identity and enabling structural variation constitutes what we refer to as the “Identity–Diversity Paradox”. A key reason behind this paradox lies in how identity is represented in a reference image. Identity is defined by a subset of visual attributes, but these attributes are entangled with spatial structure in the reference image. When models attempt to preserve identity, they often also preserve the entangled struc-tural information, which reduces diversity. Conversely, when models attempt to generate images with different structures, they risk modifying identity-defining attributes, leading to identity drift. Recent work [4] shows that diffusion backbones contain visual features that are more robust to spatial transformations by disentangling visual and semantic representations. These features provide a reliable signal for evaluating identity consistency even under pose or viewpoint changes. However, optimizing iden-tity consistency using [4] alone remains insufficient: models can still exploit the reward by reproducing the same spatial configuration as the reference image. In other words, identity-based rewards may still encourage structural mimicry by favoring configurations that closely resemble the reference image. Ideally, we would like the model to preserve identity consistency without sacrificing struc-tural diversity. To achieve this, we propose a method called DivRL for measuring struc-tural diversity through the internal relationships of visual features rather than global feature differences. Specifically, we introduce the negative Self-Similarity Measure (nSSM) , which evaluates diversity by comparing the self-similarity ma-trices of the disentangled visual feature grids extracted from the reference and generated images. Self-similarity matrices capture the intrinsic spatial organi-zation of object parts; therefore, high correlation indicates similar structural DivRL 3

layouts, while lower correlation corresponds to structurally diverse contexts. By maximizing nSSM, the model is encouraged to explore structurally different con-figurations, which often correspond to variations in pose or viewpoint. While we instantiate nSSM using MTG visual features, the formulation applies to any backbone that produces spatially structured feature grids; the identity gate is likewise replaceable by the corresponding backbone’s similarity metric. Reinforcement Learning (RL) allows the model to explore diverse outputs and select structurally novel yet identity-consistent samples. Directly optimizing consistency and diversity objectives together, however, leads to unstable train-ing and reward hacking. We therefore introduce an “Explore-and-Suppress” op-timization strategy built on top of Group Relative Policy Optimization (GRPO). The first stage encourages exploration by maximizing structural diversity through nSSM. Then, the second stage applies an identity-preserving gate using a visual similarity metric (VSM) [4], penalizing samples that deviate excessively from the subject identity. This gated formulation converts the conflict between diversity and identity into a collaborative process: the model first discovers structurally diverse solutions and then undesirable samples are further suppressed during the second-stage optimization. We evaluate our approach on the DreamBench++ benchmark [25] using the Flux-Kontext [13] backbone and compare against several subject-driven gener-ation methods. Our results show that DivRL successfully expands the diversity of generated images while maintaining strong identity consistency, effectively populating the high-utility region where both objectives coexist. Our contributions are summarized as follows: 

– We introduce the negative Self-Similarity Measure (nSSM), a feature-space metric that quantifies structural diversity via self-similarity correlations of disentangled visual features. 

– We propose an Explore-and-Suppress optimization strategy that decouples diversity exploration from identity preservation using a gated reward formu-lation. 

– Experiments on DreamBench++ demonstrate that our method improves structural diversity while maintaining competitive identity consistency. We further show that the nSSM formulation and two-stage optimization are backbone-agnostic. 

2 Related Work 

2.1 Subject-driven image generation 

Foundational image diffusion models [5, 27, 29] have achieved superior image generation quality. Building on top of the base generative models, a broad line of work tackling the subject-driven image generation fall into three main cate-gories: optimization-Based [7, 28], adapter-based [3, 8, 14, 31, 41, 42], and native multimodal models [2, 13, 18, 33, 34, 38]. Optimization-based frameworks typi-cally require a small set of images which represent the reference object, and a 4 Q. Wang et al. 

dedicated fine-tuning process for every new subject. While enabling faithful per-sonalization, they suffer from lack of high frequency details [7] or catastrophic forgetting [28]. Adapter-based methods utilize a pre-trained visual encoder to ex-tract features from a reference image and inject them into a base model. Specif-ically, [8] proposed shortcut-routed adapter training to reduce the copy-paste phenomenon. While offering high efficiency and modularity, they often struggle with complex spatial reasoning and structural flexibility. To overcome these bot-tlenecks, recently native multimodal models have emerged that utilize a unified diffusion transformer architecture, allowing for more fluid in-context interaction between visual and textual tokens. 

2.2 Reinforcement learning for visual generation 

Inspired by the success of fine-tuning language models with RL [24, 30, 43], emerging works have gained success in aligning image models with the human preferences [1, 6, 10, 22, 23, 32, 44]. Prominent work Flow-GRPO [17] integrates GRPO [30] into flow-based models for text-to-image generation. Flow-GRPO converts the deterministic ODE sampling in the flow models into an equivalent SDE, which brings randomness to support the stochastic sampling requirements of the GRPO framework. TempFlow-GRPO [9] further proposed noise-aware weighting scheme to prioritize different denoising timesteps during sampling stages. To improve the sampling efficiency of Flow-GRPO, DanceGRPO [40] selects only specific critical timesteps to update, MixedGRPO [15] applied the gradient updates only within a sliding window of the denoising timestep. Multiple features-based rewards [11,16,37,39] or VLM-based rewards [19,20, 35] are designed to measure the image quality from various aspects. To apply RL on the specific subject-driven image generation task, PaCO-RL [26] and Identity-GRPO [21] proposed pairwise consistency preferences reward modeling, measuring relative ranking of which instance is more consistent than the other given a pair of samples. Unlike these pairwise methods that optimize for relative preference, our framework introduces a gated reward mechanism to explicitly decouple identity preservation from structural mimicry, enabling the model to actively explore regions of the solution space that simultaneously satisfy identity consistency and structural diversity. 

3 Method 

We first introduce the preliminaries about Flow-GRPO. Then, we explain how we design the reward models for identity consistency and structural diversity. Afterwards, we explain our “Explore-and-Suppress” optimization strategy for aggregating two reward models using a two-stage training process. 

3.1 Preliminaries 

Flow-GRPO optimizes the policy by comparing a group of sampled outputs against their mean reward, which avoids the need for a separate value function DivRL 5Policy Model                                        

> (Flow -GRPO)
> Image 𝐼 𝑟𝑒𝑓
> Prompt 𝑐
> Group
> Sampling
> {(𝑥 𝑇
> 𝑖 ,𝑥 𝑇 −1
> 𝑖 ,…,𝑥 0
> 𝑖 )}𝑖 =1
> 𝐺
> Reverse -time trajectories
> Sample: {𝑥 0
> 𝑖 }𝑖 =1
> 𝐺 (Group) Image
> Generation
> Samples 𝐼 𝑔𝑒𝑛
> Reward Design
> MTG
> Encoder
> Semantic
> feature s
> Visual
> feature s
> Correlation
> 𝜌
> nSSM =1−𝜌
> Similarity 𝐷 𝑠
> Similarity 𝐷 𝑣
> Matching ෢𝐷 𝑠
> Matching ෢𝐷 𝑣
> Explore samples with high diversity
> nSSM (Explorer) VSM (Gater )
> 𝐼 𝑟𝑒𝑓 ,𝐼 𝑔𝑒𝑛
> Suppres ssamples with low consisteny
> Low Identity Consistency (IC) High Structural Diversity (SD) Harmful
> ✗
> High SD
> High IC
> High SD
> Low IC
> ✗
> ✗
> Origin al  Explore  Suppres s
> Two -Stage Training
> Low SD
> High IC

Fig. 2: Pipeline of our method DivRL. We design reward models VSM for identity consistency (IC) and nSSM for structural diversity (SD). A two-stage “Explore-and-Suppress” strategy is used to generate images that are both identity-consistent and structurally diverse. The first stage encourages free exploration for diverse generation, while the second stage employs a gater to filter out low-consistency samples, maintain-ing both diversity and consistency. 

and therefore reduce VRAM consumption. Concretely, for each prompt, multi-ple responses are sampled and their rewards are normalized within the group to form relative advantages. Given a prompt c, the flow model pθ samples a group of G individual images {xi

0}Gi=1 and the corresponding reverse-time tra-jectories {(xiT , x iT −1, ..., x i

0)}Gi=1 . The rewards are calculated on the clean images as R(xi

0, c ). The advantage is define as: 

bAit = R(xi

0, c ) − mean ({R(xi

0, c )}Gi=1 )

std ({R(xi

0, c )}Gi=1 ) . (1) The policy is then updated to increase the flow objective of samples with above-average rewards while suppressing below-average ones. The objective is to max-imize the following objective: 

Jθ = 1

G

GX

i=1 

1

T

TX

t=1 



min( rit(θ) bAit, clip (min( rit(θ) bAit, ϵ )) − βD KL (πθ |πref )



,r = πθ

πold 

, (2) where πθ is the current policy and πold is the previous policy, and DKL is the KL regularization term to keep the current policy not to be too far away from the reference policy πref .6 Q. Wang et al. 

3.2 Reward Design 

In subject-driven image generation, given a reference image Iref and a text prompt c, our goal is to generate both consistent ( i.e . identity consistent) and diverse ( i.e . structurally diverse) images Igen that follow the given text prompt. 

Visual Identity Consistency In the context of RL for post training, we want to find suitable reward signals for identity consistency and structural diversity. Recent work MTG [4] extracts fine visual information by disentangling the vi-sual and semantic features from the backbone of the pre-trained diffusion model. These visual features are robust under varying scales, poses, and contexts, mak-ing them a valuable metric to evaluate the performance of the identity consis-tency between generated images and reference images. Specifically, we forward Iref and Igen to the MTG network to extract se-mantic features Fs and visual features Fv , both with a shape R48 ×48 ×c, where 

c is the number of channels. We follow by computing pairwise similarities be-tween individual features to obtain semantic and visual similarity matrices Ds

and Dv , respectively. The maximum similarity score for each point is taken to compute the best per-point match: bDs = max ( Ds) and bDv = max ( Dv ). Seman-tic correspondences are identified by selecting points whose semantic similarity is above threshold τs, i.e . bDs > τ s. Visual consistency is further assessed over semantically consistent regions: 

VSM (τv ) = 1

Js

X

> j∈J s

1( Dv > τ v ) (3) where Js denotes the regions that satisfy bDs > τ s. A higher VSM generally indicates a higher visual similarity for pixels corresponded to the semantically same object, which imposes a better ID preservation. Figure 2 illustrates this process. 

Structural diversity Building on top of the visual features Fvref for Iref and 

Fvgen for Igen , we further propose negative Self-Similarity Measure (nSSM) for diversity evaluation. We first normalize Fvref and Fvgen across the channel dimen-sion to obtain bFvref and bFvref of shape R48 ×48 each. Afterwards, we calculate the SSM matrices for bFvref and bFvgen to obtain Mvgen and Mvref , respectively. The SSM matrices are calculated as: 

Mvref = bFvref ( bFvref )T , Mvgen = bFvgen ( bFvgen )T . (4) The SSM matrices capture the self-organization of the individual feature patches. We also apply the GT object mask to both Mvref and Mvref to obtain cMvref 

and cMvgen . Afterwards, we compute the Pearson correlation coefficient between DivRL 7

cMvref and cMvgen .

ρ( cMvref , cMvgen ) = cov ( cMvref , cMvgen )

σ cMvref 

σ cMvgen 

. (5) Intuitively, if the Pearson correlation coefficient is higher, that means the seman-tic and structural similarity is also higher. As we want to encourage diversity, we take the negative term of ρ( cMvref , cMvgen ) and define the final nSSM as 

nSSM = 1 − ρ( cMvref , cMvgen ). (6) This nSSM reward is computed on dense latent diffusion feature grid, which incorporates fine-grained geometry and can provide rich structural supervision. 

Stabilizing Convergence Recall that the spatial resolution of both Fvref and 

Fvgen is 48 × 48 . While this fine-grained resolution can capture rich structure-related details and make it a suitable resolution to evaluate the structural simi-larity, the model is implicitly encouraged to preserve those dense local correlation patterns during the training stage, leading to high-frequency textural artifacts. To solve this issue, we additionally apply a 2 × 2 average pooling on the normal-ized visual features to obtain downsampled features bFvref and bFvref , respectively, which are then of size 24 × 24 . The bFvref is then calculated as: 

bFvref = avgpool 2×2(normalize (Fvref )) ,

bFvgen = avgpool 2×2(normalize (Fvgen )) . (7) 

3.3 Optimization Strategy 

We propose a two-stage optimization strategy to facilitate the RL. The only dif-ference between these two stages lies in the definition of the reward for training. In the first stage, we merely use the nSSM as the reward model: 

R1 = nSSM,  (8) which effectively encourages the model to explore desirable latent region gener-ating both consistent and diverse samples. However, we empirically observe the emergence of inconsistent samples along the training due to the reward hacking (i.e ., generating random samples without any consistency can also increase the reward of nSSM). In the second stage, we introduce the VSM as a “gate” to suppress those noisy samples that provide inconsistent gradient directions. The reward is formulated as 

R2 =

(

nSSM VSM ≥ s, 

nSSM − λ(s − VSM )2 VSM < s,  (9) 8 Q. Wang et al. 

where s is a threshold for identity consistency, and λ is a weighting term for the penalty of the non-similarity degree. Intuitively, the gated reward transforms identity preservation into a feasibility constraint rather than a competing ob-jective. The model is free to explore diverse structural configurations as long as they remain within the identity-consistent region. The introduction of VSM effectively alleviates the reward hacking issue and further facilitates the opti-mization of nSSM, reduces the tendency of the model to rely on rigid solutions and explores the high-quality latent space where identity and structural novelty coexist. This avoids the optimization instability observed when diversity and identity are directly combined through linear weighting. 

4 Experiments 

4.1 Implementation details Settings We adopt the vanilla Flow-GRPO framework to optimize the model and use Flux-Kontext [13] as the backbone for subject-driven image generation. Training is conducted on a 10k subset of the SynCD dataset [12], where each identity is paired with 10 text prompts. For the reward model, we set the se-mantic and visual thresholds to τs = 0 .7 and τv = 0 .7, respectively. The hinge parameters are set to λ = 5 and s = 0 .5. Training is performed in two stages: 3200 optimization steps for the exploration stage, followed by 3200 steps for the suppression stage. For Flow-GRPO, the group size is set to 21 ,and the num-ber of denoising steps during sampling is 6. The KL regularization coefficient is 

β = 0 .1. During inference, we use 28 denoising steps. Training is conducted on 8 NVIDIA A100 (80GB) GPUs, with each training stage taking 24 hours. 

Evaluation We evaluate the models from four perspectives: identity consis-tency, structural diversity, prompt following, and aesthetic quality. For identity consistency, we report the out-of-domain metrics CLIP image cosine similar-ity and DINO cosine similarity, as well as the in-domain metric VSM. We ad-ditionally report the consistency ratio , defined as the percentage of generated samples satisfying VSM > 0.6 for in-domain evaluation, and structural DINO sDINO > 0.75 for out-of-domain evaluation. For structural diversity, we report the in-domain metric MTG-nSSM and out-of-domain metrics including DINO-nSSM, scale-invariant IoU, and LPIPS. DINO-nSSM is computed using the same formulation as MTG-nSSM but with DINO features instead of MTG visual fea-tures. We further report diversity-over-consistency , which measures diversity among identity-consistent samples. The in-domain version computes the aver-age MTG-nSSM over samples with VSM > 0.6, while the out-of-domain version computes the average DINO-nSSM over samples with sDINO > 0.75 . We will provide the detailed definition of the metrics in the Supplementary Materials. All evaluations are conducted on DreamBench++ [25], which contains 150 identi-ties spanning animals, humans, objects, and style transfer scenarios, each paired with 9 text prompts. DivRL 9

Table 1: Comparison of different subject-driven generation models across various met-rics.                                                                                    

> Prompt foll. Identity consistency Diversity Aesthetic Model CLIP-T ↑CLIP-I ↑DINO ↑VSM-0.7 ↑DINO-nSSM ↑Scale-inv IOU ↓MTG-nSSM ↑HPS ↑
> Flux-IP-Adapter 0.274 0.805 0.568 0.481 0.531 0.593 0.765 0.275 OmniGen 0.293 0.735 0.474 0.464 0.546 0.583 0.786 0.301 OmniGen2 0.301 0.802 0.559 0.460 0.496 0.638 0.727 0.311 UNO 0.209 0.710 0.387 0.454 0.590 0.637 0.816 0.215 Flux-Kontext 0.283 0.781 0.594 0.605 0.433 0.694 0.659 0.294 PaCo-RL 0.287 0.766 0.570 0.576 0.445 0.683 0.668 0.302 DivRL (VSM only) 0.278 0.806 0.670 0.688 0.383 0.757 0.608 0.291
> DivRL (nSSM only) 0.287 0.756 0.520 0.562 0.489 0.634 0.704 0.293
> DivRL (VSM + nSSM) 0.279 0.786 0.600 0.614 0.453 0.694 0.689 0.287

Baselines We compare our method with Flux-IP-Adapter 1, OmniGen [38], OmniGen2 [34], UNO [36], PaCo-RL [26], and the original Flux-Kontext [13]. Flux-IP-Adapter injects image conditioning into the Flux backbone through an IP-Adapter module. OmniGen and OmniGen2 are unified multimodal mod-els capable of handling various image-conditioned generation tasks. UNO is a multi-image conditioned multimodal model designed for subject-driven genera-tion. PaCo-RL introduces a pairwise consistency reward model and fine-tunes Flux-Kontext using Flow-GRPO. All methods are evaluated at a resolution of 

1024 × 1024 .

4.2 Quantitative results 

We present a quantitative evaluation of different methods in terms of prompt following, identity consistency, structural diversity ,and aesthetic in Table 1. We categorize the methods into two different categories: Flux-Kontext-based models and others. In addition to our full model, we report two variants trained with a single reward signal: VSM-only and nSSM-only, which illustrate the optimiza-tion boundaries of identity consistency and structural diversity. Optimizing with VSM alone significantly improves identity consistency compared to the base-lines, but leads to a noticeable drop in diversity metrics. In contrast, optimizing with nSSM alone substantially increases structural diversity but reduces identity consistency. By combining the two rewards through our proposed optimization strategy, our method achieves a better balance between identity consistency and structural diversity. In particular, it improves diversity over the Flux-Kontext baseline while maintaining comparable identity consistency. Interestingly, even without explicitly optimizing for text alignment, our method achieves strong prompt-following performance, with the nSSM-only variant ob-taining the highest text-alignment score. This phenomenon can be explained by the geometric rigidity induced by identity preservation during pretraining. En-couraging structural diversity through nSSM relaxes this rigidity, allowing the model to better adapt the subject to the contextual requirements of the prompt.  

> 1

https://huggingface.co/XLabs-AI/flux-ip-adapter 10 Q. Wang et al. 0.3 0.4 0.5 0.6 0.7     

> Consistency Ratio
> 0.60
> 0.65
> 0.70
> 0.75
> 0.80
> Diversity / Consistency
> Ours
> Ours (VSM only)
> Ours (nSSM only)
> In-Domain (MTG)
> Consistency vs. Diversity
> 0.3 0.4 0.5 0.6 0.7
> Consistency Ratio
> 0.35
> 0.40
> 0.45
> 0.50
> 0.55
> Diversity / Consistency
> Ours
> Ours (VSM only)
> Ours (nSSM only)
> Out-of-Domain (DINO)
> Consistency vs. Diversity
> Flux-Kontext
> Ours
> Ours (VSM only)
> Ours (nSSM only)
> UNO
> PaCo-RL
> OmniGen
> OmniGen2
> Flux-IP-Apdater

Fig. 3: Quantitative evaluation of the trade-off between identity consistency and struc-tural diversity. Results are reported using both in-domain metrics (MTG) and out-of-domain metrics (DINO). 

We further analyze the trade-off between consistency and diversity in Fig-ure 3 using the consistency ratio and diversity-over-consistency metrics. Both in-domain and out-of-domain evaluations show that non-Flux-Kontext-based mod-els achieve high diversity for samples that pass the consistency threshold, but their overall consistency ratio is significantly lower than that of Flux-Kontext-based methods. This suggests that these models struggle to reliably preserve sub-ject identity, which is a fundamental requirement in subject-driven generation. Notably, OmniGen2 demonstrates markedly improved global feature similarity over OmniGen, yet its VSM score and consistency ratio remain low, indicating that it still falls short of reliable fine-grained identity preservation and cannot close the gap with Flux-Kontext-based methods on this dimension. Among Flux-Kontext-based methods, the base Flux-Kontext model already achieves strong identity preservation, reflected by its high consistency ratio. PaCo-RL produces slightly more diverse outputs but exhibits a lower consistency ratio compared to the base model. The two variants of our method demonstrate the expected extremes: the nSSM-only model achieves higher diversity but lower consistency, while the VSM-only model achieves the highest consistency ratio but the lowest diversity. Our full method combines the advantages of both vari-ants, maintaining a consistency level comparable to the baselines while achieving improved diversity. 

4.3 Qualitative results 

We present qualitative comparisons between our method and the baselines in Figure 4. The examples include both rigid objects ( e.g ., bicycle and van) and articulated objects ( e.g ., stork and human). Our method preserves the fine visual details of the reference subject while following the text prompt and exhibiting structural diversity, such as changes in pose and viewpoint. Flux-Kontext and PaCo-RL produce visually plausible results but often ex-hibit two failure modes. First, they occasionally fail to preserve fine-grained visual details. Second, although they maintain identity consistency, they some-DivRL 11 Input            

> Flux
> IP -Adapter PaCo -RL OmniGen2
> Flux
> Kontext UNO DivRL
> “A photograph of a bicycle
> with a flower basket in front
> of an old cafe”
> “A photo of a wooden hut
> nestled among snow -
> covered pines”
> “An anime -style illustration
> of a girl flying a kite on a
> windy hill”
> “A photograph of a maple
> leaf floating on a quiet
> forest pond ”
> “A digital painting of a clock
> melting over surreal,
> dreamlike landscapes”
> “A photograph of a vintage
> van traveling through a
> colorful autumn forest”
> “A photograph of a girl riding
> a bicycle through a quiet
> village”

Fig. 4: Visual comparison with baselines. Our method produces structurally diverse images while preserving identity consistency and maintaining good prompt alignment. 

times fail to follow the prompt interactions. This behavior stems from the strong emphasis on identity preservation, which encourages the model to reproduce a subject configuration similar to the reference rather than adapting it to the contextual instructions. Other non–Flux-Kontext-based models tend to produce more structurally di-verse outputs, which is consistent with the quantitative results. However, they exhibit different limitations. Flux-IP-Adapter often lacks fine visual details and overall fidelity. UNO generates visually consistent subjects but struggles with prompt alignment. OmniGen produces diverse and visually appealing images but frequently fails to preserve identity. These observations highlight the diffi-culty of simultaneously achieving strong identity preservation, structural diver-sity, prompt following, and high visual quality. Building upon the strong iden-tity preservation capability of Flux-Kontext, our method relaxes the structural rigidity of the base model, enabling more diverse subject configurations while maintaining identity consistency and improving prompt alignment. 12 Q. Wang et al. nSSM       

> only
> VSM
> only
> Ours
> nSSM
> only
> VSM
> only
> Ours
> “… serving
> coffee”
> “… playing
> chess”
> “… exploring
> ocean” “… teaching” “… gardening”
> “… dancing in
> the ballroom ”
> “… autumn
> trees”
> “Watercolor
> painting …”
> “… floating on
> a cloud …
> staircase” “… on Mars ”
> “… frozen
> lake”
> “Children
> playing …”

Fig. 5: Qualitative comparison between optimizing using nSSM only, VSM only, and ours. We highlight cases of identity inconsistency, prompt misalignment, and struc-tural rigidity. Our method DivRL achieves the best balance between prompt following, identity preservation, and structural diversity. 

4.4 Ablation Studies Single-Reward Optimization We further compare our method with the two reward variants in Figure 5. Optimizing with nSSM alone produces higher struc-tural diversity by generating subjects with different poses and viewpoints, but it may alter the subject’s core attributes and lead to identity drift. In contrast, optimizing with VSM alone achieves strong identity preservation but may result in overly constrained outputs with poses and viewpoints similar to the reference image. In some cases, the model even preserves the original visual style of the reference, ignoring stylistic instructions from the prompt. By combining nSSM and VSM, our method achieves a better balance between identity consistency, structural diversity, and prompt following. 

Optimization Strategy Our goal is to balance identity consistency and diver-sity during optimization. Since Flux-Kontext already provides strong identity preservation, we focus on improving diversity without degrading consistency. To analyze this trade-off, we compare our method with linear combinations of VSM and nSSM, as shown in Figure 6. As the training progression curves show, our method produces a modest but sufficient increase in VSM while achieving a substantial gain in nSSM over the Flux-Kontext baseline. Linear weighting, by contrast, usually fails to simultaneously improve both objectives. This can DivRL 13 0 50 100 150 200               

> Training Epochs
> 0.4
> 0.5
> 0.6
> 0.7
> 0.8
> Metric Value
> VSM PROGRESSION
> 050 100 150 200
> Training Epochs
> 0.50
> 0.55
> 0.60
> 0.65
> 0.70
> 0.75
> 0.80
> 0.85
> Metric Value
> NSSM PROGRESSION
> 0.40 0.45 0.50 0.55 0.60 0.65 0.70 0.75
> Consistency Ratio
> 0.56
> 0.58
> 0.60
> 0.62
> 0.64
> 0.66
> 0.68
> 0.70
> 0.72
> Diversity / Consistency
> TRADE-OFF FRONTIER
> DivRL
> Flux-Kontext
> 1:0
> 0.8:0.2
> 0.6:0.4
> 0.5:0.5
> 0.4:0.6
> 0.3:0.7
> 0.2:0.8
> 0:1
> DivRL (Stage 1)
> DivRL (Stage 2)
> 0.4:0.6 0.5:0.5 0.6:0.4 DivRL
> Flux-Kontext
> Linear baselines
> Trade-off Path

Fig. 6: Comparison between our optimization strategy and linear reward weighting. Left is the training progression curve, while right is the trade-off frontier between the 

consistency ratio and diversity-over-consistency . For the linear weighting annotation, it is denoted as the linear ratio between VSM and nSSM. Reference    

> Gen 1
> Gen 2
> Image Mask SSM map nSSM
> 0.199
> 0.331
> --

Fig. 7: Visual-ization of the SSM maps and the correspond-ing nSSM scores. Original 

> feature
> Original
> feature
> Original
> feature
> Downsampled
> feature
> Downsampled
> feature
> Downsampled
> feature

Fig. 8: Comparison between computing nSSM using the original vi-sual feature resolution and using downsampled features. Optimiza-tion with the original resolution introduces high-frequency artifacts, whereas downsampled features suppress these artifacts and produce visually pleasing results. 

also be verified in the trade-off frontier graph that none of the linear weighting combinations can improve the consistency ratio as well as the diversity-over-consistency at the same time. This failure occurs because the gradients from the two reward signals are in direct competition under a linear combination. The gated formulation in our method decouples these two objectives: the model first explores structurally diverse solutions, and the identity gate selectively sup-presses only those that drift beyond the consistency threshold, allowing VSM and nSSM to improve jointly. 

nSSM visualization We visualize the Self-Similarity Measure (SSM) maps in Fig 7. The similarity scores within the masked region are aggregated to produce the SSM maps. When a generated image closely matches the reference structure (Gen 1), the SSM maps exhibit high similarity, resulting in a lower nSSM score. In contrast, a sample with a different pose (Gen 2) produces less similar SSM maps and therefore yields a higher nSSM score. During training, masks are not generated for synthesized images; instead, nSSM is computed using features from all spatial locations of the generated images. 14 Q. Wang et al. 

Spatial Resolution of the Self-Similarity Measure The MTG visual fea-tures have a spatial resolution of 48 × 48 . While this resolution captures fine structural details, we found that directly computing nSSM at this scale leads to high-frequency artifacts during RL optimization. We hypothesize that opti-mizing structural similarity at such fine granularity encourages the model to reproduce dense local correlation patterns, allowing it to increase nSSM through high-frequency textures rather than meaningful structural changes, which is a form of reward hacking. To mitigate this issue, we apply 2 × 2 average pooling to downsample the feature maps to 24 × 24 before computing nSSM. As shown in Figure 8, the downsampled features effectively suppress high-frequency artifacts and produce visually cleaner results. 

5 Discussion and Limitations 

Our results highlight an important observation in subject-driven generation: identity preservation rewards alone implicitly encourage structural mimicry. Our framework addresses this issue by explicitly separating structural diversity from identity preservation. An interesting side effect of encouraging structural diver-sity is the improvement in prompt interaction. As shown in our experiments, relaxing structural rigidity allows the model to better adapt the subject to con-textual cues in the prompt. 

Limitations. Despite these advantages, several limitations were observed. Firstly, the proposed diversity metric focuses on structural variations in pose and view-point, and may not fully capture higher-level semantic diversity or compositional changes. Secondly, our approach relies on RL for post-training, which introduces additional computational overhead compared to purely feed-forward methods. Finally, our base model Flux-Kontext accepts a single reference image by de-fault and may be less effective when the reference contains ambiguous identity cues or complex occlusions. Addressing these limitations through richer diversity metrics, more efficient optimization strategies, and multi-reference conditioning is an interesting direction for future work. 

6 Conclusions 

In this paper, we investigate the identity–diversity trade-off in subject-driven image generation. We identify structural mimicry as a common failure mode in existing methods, where models tend to reproduce the spatial configuration of the reference image instead of generating diverse structures. To address this chal-lenge, we propose a RL-based framework that decouples structural diversity from identity preservation. We introduce a negative Self-Similarity Measure (nSSM) to quantify structural diversity and employ Visual Semantic Matching (VSM) as an identity consistency gate. Combined with an Explore-and-Suppress opti-mization strategy based on Flow-GRPO, this formulation encourages the model to explore diverse structural configurations while filtering identity-inconsistent samples. Experiments demonstrate that the proposed method improves struc-tural diversity while maintaining strong identity consistency, achieving a better balance between diversity, prompt following, and identity preservation compared with existing approaches. DivRL 15 

References 

1. Black, K., Janner, M., Du, Y., Kostrikov, I., Levine, S.: Training diffusion models with reinforcement learning (2023) 2. Chen, J., Xu, Z., Pan, X., Hu, Y., Qin, C., Goldstein, T., Huang, L., Zhou, T., Xie, S., Savarese, S., et al.: Blip3-o: A family of fully open unified multimodal models-architecture, training and dataset. arXiv preprint arXiv:2505.09568 (2025) 3. Chen, X., Huang, L., Liu, Y., Shen, Y., Zhao, D., Zhao, H.: Anydoor: Zero-shot object-level image customization. In: Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF conference on computer vision and pattern recognition. pp. 6593–6602 (2024) 4. Eldesokey, A., Cvejic, A., Ghanem, B., Wonka, P.: Mind-the-glitch: Visual corre-spondence for detecting inconsistencies in subject-driven generation. In: Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems (2025) 5. Esser, P., Kulal, S., Blattmann, A., Entezari, R., Müller, J., Saini, H., Levi, Y., Lorenz, D., Sauer, A., Boesel, F., et al.: Scaling rectified flow transformers for high-resolution image synthesis. In: Forty-first international conference on machine learning (2024) 6. Fan, Y., Watkins, O., Du, Y., Liu, H., Ryu, M., Boutilier, C., Abbeel, P., Ghavamzadeh, M., Lee, K., Lee, K.: Dpok: Reinforcement learning for fine-tuning text-to-image diffusion models. Advances in Neural Information Processing Sys-tems 36 , 79858–79885 (2023) 7. Gal, R., Alaluf, Y., Atzmon, Y., Patashnik, O., Bermano, A.H., Chechik, G., Cohen-Or, D.: An image is worth one word: Personalizing text-to-image genera-tion using textual inversion. In: The Eleventh International Conference on Learning Representations (2023), https://openreview.net/forum?id=NAQvF08TcyG 

8. Goyal, A., Qian, G., Coskun, H., Gupta, A., Tam, H., Ostashev, D., Hu, J., Sagar, D., Tulyakov, S., Aberman, K., Wang, K.C.: Preventing shortcuts in adapter train-ing via providing the shortcuts. In: The Thirty-ninth Annual Conference on Neu-ral Information Processing Systems (2025), https://openreview.net/forum?id= cZMno8E3yp 

9. He, X., Fu, S., Zhao, Y., Li, W., Yang, J., Yin, D., Rao, F., Zhang, B.: TEMPFLOW-GRPO: WHEN TIMING MATTERS FOR GRPO IN FLOW MOD-ELS. In: The Fourteenth International Conference on Learning Representations (2026), https://openreview.net/forum?id=7mCo3R3Wyn 

10. Hu, Z., Zhang, F., Chen, L., Kuang, K., Li, J., Gao, K., Xiao, J., Wang, X., Zhu, W.: Towards better alignment: Training diffusion models with reinforcement learn-ing against sparse rewards. In: Proceedings of the Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition Conference. pp. 23604–23614 (2025) 11. Kirstain, Y., Polyak, A., Singer, U., Matiana, S., Penna, J., Levy, O.: Pick-a-pic: An open dataset of user preferences for text-to-image generation. Advances in neural information processing systems 36 , 36652–36663 (2023) 12. Kumari, N., Yin, X., Zhu, J.Y., Misra, I., Azadi, S.: Generating multi-image syn-thetic data for text-to-image customization. In: IEEE International Conference on Computer Vision (ICCV) (2025) 13. Labs, B.F., Batifol, S., Blattmann, A., Boesel, F., Consul, S., Diagne, C., Dockhorn, T., English, J., English, Z., Esser, P., Kulal, S., Lacey, K., Levi, Y., Li, C., Lorenz, D., Müller, J., Podell, D., Rombach, R., Saini, H., Sauer, A., Smith, L.: Flux.1 kontext: Flow matching for in-context image generation and editing in latent space (2025), https://arxiv.org/abs/2506.15742 16 Q. Wang et al. 14. Li, D., Li, J., Hoi, S.: BLIP-diffusion: Pre-trained subject representation for con-trollable text-to-image generation and editing. In: Thirty-seventh Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (2023), https://openreview.net/forum? id=g6We1SwaY9 

15. Li, J., Cui, Y., Huang, T., Ma, Y., Fan, C., Yang, M., Zhong, Z.: Mixgrpo: Unlock-ing flow-based grpo efficiency with mixed ode-sde. arXiv preprint arXiv:2507.21802 (2025) 16. Lin, Z., Pathak, D., Li, B., Li, J., Xia, X., Neubig, G., Zhang, P., Ramanan, D.: Evaluating text-to-visual generation with image-to-text generation. In: European Conference on Computer Vision. pp. 366–384. Springer (2024) 17. Liu, J., Liu, G., Liang, J., Li, Y., Liu, J., Wang, X., Wan, P., ZHANG, D., Ouyang, W.: Flow-GRPO: Training flow matching models via online RL. In: The Thirty-ninth Annual Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (2025), https: //openreview.net/forum?id=oCBKGw5HNf 

18. Liu, Z., Ren, W., Liu, H., Zhou, Z., Chen, S., Qiu, H., Huang, X., An, Z., Yang, F., Patel, A., et al.: Tuna: Taming unified visual representations for native unified multimodal models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2512.02014 (2025) 19. Long, Y., Yang, Y., Wei, H., Chen, W., Zhang, T., Liu, C., Jiang, K., Chen, J., Tang, K., Wen, B., et al.: Spatialreward: Bridging the perception gap in online rl for image editing via explicit spatial reasoning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2602.07458 (2026) 20. Luo, X., Wang, J., Wu, C., Xiao, S., Jiang, X., Lian, D., Zhang, J., Liu, D., et al.: Editscore: Unlocking online rl for image editing via high-fidelity reward modeling. arXiv preprint arXiv:2509.23909 (2025) 21. Meng, X., Zhang, Z., Zhang, Z., Liao, J., Qin, L., Wang, W.: Identity-grpo: Opti-mizing multi-human identity-preserving video generation via reinforcement learn-ing. arXiv preprint arXiv:2510.14256 (2025) 22. Miao, Z., Wang, J., Wang, Z., Yang, Z., Wang, L., Qiu, Q., Liu, Z.: Training diffusion models towards diverse image generation with reinforcement learning. In: Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition. pp. 10844–10853 (2024) 23. Na, S., Kim, Y., Lee, H.: Boost your human image generation model via direct pref-erence optimization. In: Proceedings of the Computer Vision and Pattern Recog-nition Conference. pp. 23551–23562 (2025) 24. Ouyang, L., Wu, J., Jiang, X., Almeida, D., Wainwright, C., Mishkin, P., Zhang, C., Agarwal, S., Slama, K., Ray, A., et al.: Training language models to follow instructions with human feedback. Advances in neural information processing sys-tems 35 , 27730–27744 (2022) 25. Peng, Y., Cui, Y., Tang, H., Qi, Z., Dong, R., Bai, J., Han, C., Ge, Z., Zhang, X., Xia, S.T.: Dreambench++: A human-aligned benchmark for personalized image generation. In: The Thirteenth International Conference on Learning Representa-tions (2025), https://dreambenchplus.github.io/ 

26. Ping, B., Jia, C., Luo, M., Xia, C., Shen, X., Dang, Z., Qian, H.: Paco-rl: Advanc-ing reinforcement learning for consistent image generation with pairwise reward modeling. arXiv preprint arXiv:2512.04784 (2025) 27. Rombach, R., Blattmann, A., Lorenz, D., Esser, P., Ommer, B.: High-resolution image synthesis with latent diffusion models. In: Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF conference on computer vision and pattern recognition. pp. 10684–10695 (2022) 28. Ruiz, N., Li, Y., Jampani, V., Pritch, Y., Rubinstein, M., Aberman, K.: Dream-booth: Fine tuning text-to-image diffusion models for subject-driven generation. DivRL 17 In: Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (2023) 29. Sauer, A., Boesel, F., Dockhorn, T., Blattmann, A., Esser, P., Rombach, R.: Fast high-resolution image synthesis with latent adversarial diffusion distillation. In: SIGGRAPH Asia 2024 Conference Papers. pp. 1–11 (2024) 30. Shao, Z., Wang, P., Zhu, Q., Xu, R., Song, J., Bi, X., Zhang, H., Zhang, M., Li, Y.K., Wu, Y., Guo, D.: Deepseekmath: Pushing the limits of mathematical reasoning in open language models (2024), https://arxiv.org/abs/2402.03300 

31. Shi, J., Xiong, W., Lin, Z., Jung, H.J.: Instantbooth: Personalized text-to-image generation without test-time finetuning. In: Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF confer-ence on computer vision and pattern recognition. pp. 8543–8552 (2024) 32. Wallace, B., Dang, M., Rafailov, R., Zhou, L., Lou, A., Purushwalkam, S., Ermon, S., Xiong, C., Joty, S., Naik, N.: Diffusion model alignment using direct preference optimization. In: Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR). pp. 8228–8238 (June 2024) 33. Wu, C., Li, J., Zhou, J., Lin, J., Gao, K., Yan, K., ming Yin, S., Bai, S., Xu, X., Chen, Y., Chen, Y., Tang, Z., Zhang, Z., Wang, Z., Yang, A., Yu, B., Cheng, C., Liu, D., Li, D., Zhang, H., Meng, H., Wei, H., Ni, J., Chen, K., Cao, K., Peng, L., Qu, L., Wu, M., Wang, P., Yu, S., Wen, T., Feng, W., Xu, X., Wang, Y., Zhang, Y., Zhu, Y., Wu, Y., Cai, Y., Liu, Z.: Qwen-image technical report (2025), 

https://arxiv.org/abs/2508.02324 

34. Wu, C., Zheng, P., Yan, R., Xiao, S., Luo, X., Wang, Y., Li, W., Jiang, X., Liu, Y., Zhou, J., Liu, Z., Xia, Z., Li, C., Deng, H., Wang, J., Luo, K., Zhang, B., Lian, D., Wang, X., Wang, Z., Huang, T., Liu, Z.: Omnigen2: Exploration to advanced multimodal generation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2506.18871 (2025) 35. Wu, K., Jiang, S., Ku, M., Nie, P., Liu, M., Chen, W.: Editreward: Ahuman-aligned reward model for instruction-guided image editing. arXiv preprint arXiv:2509.26346 (2025) 36. Wu, S., Huang, M., Wu, W., Cheng, Y., Ding, F., He, Q.: Less-to-more general-ization: Unlocking more controllability by in-context generation. In: Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer Vision. pp. 18682–18692 (2025) 37. Wu, X., Hao, Y., Sun, K., Chen, Y., Zhu, F., Zhao, R., Li, H.: Human preference score v2: A solid benchmark for evaluating human preferences of text-to-image synthesis. arXiv preprint arXiv:2306.09341 (2023) 38. Xiao, S., Wang, Y., Zhou, J., Yuan, H., Xing, X., Yan, R., Li, C., Wang, S., Huang, T., Liu, Z.: Omnigen: Unified image generation. In: Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR). pp. 13294– 13304 (June 2025) 39. Xu, J., Liu, X., Wu, Y., Tong, Y., Li, Q., Ding, M., Tang, J., Dong, Y.: Imagere-ward: learning and evaluating human preferences for text-to-image generation. In: Proceedings of the 37th International Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems. pp. 15903–15935 (2023) 40. Xue, Z., Wu, J., Gao, Y., Kong, F., Zhu, L., Chen, M., Liu, Z., Liu, W., Guo, Q., Huang, W., et al.: Dancegrpo: Unleashing grpo on visual generation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2505.07818 (2025) 41. Ye, H., Zhang, J., Liu, S., Han, X., Yang, W.: Ip-adapter: Text compatible image prompt adapter for text-to-image diffusion models (2023) 42. Zhang, L., Rao, A., Agrawala, M.: Adding conditional control to text-to-image diffusion models (2023) 18 Q. Wang et al. 43. Zheng, R., Dou, S., Gao, S., Hua, Y., Shen, W., Wang, B., Liu, Y., Jin, S., Liu, Q., Zhou, Y., et al.: Secrets of rlhf in large language models part i: Ppo. arXiv preprint arXiv:2307.04964 (2023) 44. Zhu, H., Xiao, T., Honavar, V.G.: DSPO: Direct score preference optimization for diffusion model alignment. In: The Thirteenth International Conference on Learn-ing Representations (2025), https://openreview.net/forum?id=xyfb9HHvMe 

A Evaluation metrics 

A.1 Structural DINO (sDINO) 

sDINO measures the structural similarity between the patches across the refer-ence image Iref and the generated image Igen . It focuses on the local feature correspondence. Specifically, let G = g1, g 2, ..., g n be the set of n patch embed-dings for the generated image, and R = r1, r 2, ..., r m be the set of m patch embeddings for the reference image. The Structural DINO (sDINO) score is de-fined as the mean of the maximum cosine similarities between each generated patch and the entire set of reference patches: 

sDINO (G, R ) = 1

n

> n

X

> i=1

max 

> j∈{ 1,...,m }

 gi · rj

∥gi∥∥ rj ∥



(10) 

A.2 Scale-Invariant IoU 

Scale-Invariant Intersection over Union (si-IoU) measures the shape similarity between the segmentation masks of the generated subject and the reference subject by decoupling their relative sizes and positions. As we already have the ground-truth reference image mask Mr , we first use an off-the-shelf segmentation model to extract the segmentation mask Ms for the generated subject. Then, we crop the regions of both masks to get the tightest axis-aligned bounding boxes containing all non-zero pixels fMr and fMg , respectively. We follow by reshaping 

fMg to cMg in order to match the spatial resolution of fMr . Finally, we compute the IoU between cMg and fMr . Intuitively, a higher number of si-IoU indicates a higher structural similarity between the generated subject and the reference subject. 

B Implementation Details: Computation, Metrics and Evaluation 

We train our model for 48 hours on 8 A100 80GB GPUs, with each optimization stage taking 24 hours. The LoRA weights add 1.8% parameters to the base Flux-Kontext model. Our inference time to generate one image under 28 denoising steps is 34s on 1 A100 40GB GPU, which is the same cost as the base model. To evaluate subject-driven generation performance, we employ a suite of vision-language and structural similarity metrics. For CLIP Text (CLIP-T) and DivRL 19 

CLIP Image (CLIP-I) similarity, we use ViT-L/14 as the backbone. In line with standard practice, CLIP-I is calculated using the full reference and generated images without object masking. Similarly, DINO cosine similarity is computed using the full images, but with DINOv2-base as the base model. For finer structural evaluation, specifically DINO-nSSM, MTG-nSSM, and sDINO, we utilize DINOv2-small as the backbone. For these metrics, we extract features exclusively from the subject regions using subject masks for both refer-ence and generated images. Masks for the generated images are generated dur-ing the evaluation stage using the off-the-shelf Grounded-Segment-Anything 2

model. Notably, our observations indicate that results remain consistent whether or not features outside the generated subject mask are excluded. When calculating VSM and MTG-nSSM, we omit the “style” sub-category from the DreamBench++ benchmark because style transfer is fundamentally distinct from subject-driven generation. Since the subject of interest often exists only in the text prompt and not the reference style image, establishing meaning-ful correspondences for VSM calculation; however, to maintain consistency with prior work, the “style” sub-category is included for all other evaluation metrics. Regarding the resolution of the visual features map, we use average pooling to downsample the visual feature maps from 48 × 48 to 24 × 24 during training to mitigate high-frequency artifacts, as discussed in our ablation study in the main paper. During evaluation, we maintain the original 48 ×48 resolution to en-sure the metrics remain sensitive to fine-grained structural changes and intricate details. 

C Backbone Generalization 

The nSSM reward is computed over any dense visual feature grid, and the two-stage gated optimization is compatible with any differentiable identity consis-tency metric. This makes the framework backbone-agnostic: when using a dif-ferent feature extractor, nSSM is computed using that backbone’s patch fea-tures, while VSM is replaced by an appropriate similarity metric for the chosen backbone. To verify this, we replace MTG features with DINOv2 features and substitute the cosine similarity as the identity gate, re-running the full two-stage optimization with the same hyperparameters. As shown in Table 2, the DINO-backbone variant achieves performance comparable to the MTG-backbone de-fault across all metrics, with a slight improvement in consistency ratio and diversity-over-consistency. This confirms that the Explore-and-Suppress frame-work can generalize beyond the default MTG feature backbone. 

D Ablation study 

We provide an ablation on the threshold s for the hinge loss during Stage 2 of the optimization. We report the comprehensive quantitative results in Table 3.  

> 2https://github.com/IDEA-Research/Grounded-Segment-Anything

20 Q. Wang et al. 

Table 2: Backbone generalization: our method using MTG vs. DINOv2 visual features.                                    

> Prompt foll. Identity consistency Diversity Aesthetic Model CLIP-T ↑CLIP-I ↑DINO ↑VSM-0.7 ↑DINO-nSSM ↑Scale-inv IOU ↓MTG-nSSM ↑HPS ↑
> Flux-Kontext 0.283 0.781 0.594 0.605 0.433 0.694 0.659 0.294 Ours (MTG backbone) 0.279 0.786 0.600 0.614 0.453 0.697 0.689 0.287 Ours (DINO backbone) 0.280 0.780 0.595 0.602 0.455 0.693 0.698 0.297

Table 3: Ablation on the threshold s.                                                       

> Prompt foll. Identity consistency Diversity Aesthetic Model CLIP-T ↑CLIP-I ↑DINO ↑VSM-0.7 ↑DINO-nSSM ↑Scale-inv IOU ↓MTG-nSSM ↑HPS ↑
> Flux-Kontext 0.283 0.781 0.594 0.605 0.433 0.694 0.659 0.294
> s= 0 .40.282 0.761 0.527 0.534 0.487 0.652 0.713 0.297
> s= 0 .50.279 0.786 0.600 0.614 0.453 0.697 0.689 0.287
> s= 0 .60.284 0.781 0.592 0.596 0.446 0.685 0.671 0.294
> s= 0 .70.286 0.773 0.560 0.570 0.476 0.663 0.707 0.301

In addition, we also include OmniGen2 [34] for comparison. We show that s has a noticeable impact on the performance of the models. Optimizing with s = 0 .7

will result in the best structural diversity. However, the identity consistency has a slight drop. Optimizing with s = 0 .4 will result in the best diversity, with a cost of lower identity consistency than the baseline. We empirically find out that using s = 0 .5 can achieve the best balance between the identity consistency and diversity, so we use it as our default setting. From the qualitative results, we observed that both s = 0 .5 and 0.6 obtain the best results and both can be used in practice. We provide another ablation on the weighting term λ during the second stage of optimization in Table 4. Using λ = 0 .5 applies a weak penalty on identity drift; the model has a weak penalty of identity drift, resulting in high diversity but low VSM. Conversely, using λ = 50 produces a counterintuitive result: despite the stronger penalty, VSM is lower than with λ = 5 . We attribute this to optimization instability. When the penalty coefficient is very large, any sample with VSM < s generates an extremely large gradient signal. This causes destabilizing parameter updates that prevent stable convergence. λ = 5 strikes the right balance: firm enough to suppress identity-inconsistent samples, but not so large as to destabilize optimization. 

E More qualitative results 

E.1 Multi-prompt comparison 

In Figure 9, we present visual results of images generated from a single refer-ence image across diverse text prompts. These results demonstrate our method’s ability to maintain identity across multiple contexts. This is particularly evident in the more challenging "motorcycle" example, where our approach faithfully preserves fine-grained shapes and components across varying viewpoints. DivRL 21 

Table 4: Ablation on the weighting parameter λ.

Prompt foll. Identity consistency Diversity Aesthetic Model CLIP-T ↑ CLIP-I ↑ DINO ↑ VSM-0.7 ↑ DINO-nSSM ↑ Scale-inv IOU ↓ MTG-nSSM ↑ HPS ↑

Flux-Kontext 0.283 0.781 0.594 0.605 0.433 0.694 0.659 0.294 

λ = 0 .5 0.286 0.764 0.537 0.535 0.487 0.727 0.724 0.297 

λ = 5 0.279 0.786 0.600 0.614 0.453 0.697 0.689 0.287 

λ = 50 0.283 0.780 0.583 0.580 0.469 0.716 0.689 0.293 “Sketch …      

> nuzzling ….” “… basking ”“… crouching ”
> “… with a vibrant
> coat”
> “… crossing a
> frozen creek”
> “… floating on a
> cloud” “… surrounded by
> autumn leaves”
> “Animate style …
> holding a small
> umbrella”
> “… herding
> sheep ”
> “… maneuvering
> kayak”
> “… focusing on
> rear wheel”
> “… parked in front
> of a stone
> building”
> “… Looking
> down”
> “… covered in
> mud …”
> “Colorful,
> custom -painted
> …”

Flux 

Kontext 

DivRL 

Flux 

Kontext 

Flux 

Kontext 

DivRL 

DivRL 

Fig. 9: Comparison between the original Flux-Kontext and DivRL under the multi-prompt setting. 

E.2 Multi-seed comparison 

In Figure 10, we present visual results of image generated from a single ref-erence image and a single text prompt under different random seeds. These results demonstrate our method’s ability to produce diverse subject structures and viewpoints. Notably, in the first example of Figure 10, the images gener-22 Q. Wang et al. “… riding a horse in a lavender field” 

> “… reading a newspaper with a blue suit ”
> “… conducting a classical orchestra with a tiny baton”
> Flux
> Kontext
> Flux
> Kontext
> Flux
> Kontext
> DivRL
> DivRL
> DivRL

Fig. 10: Comparison between the original Flux-Kontext and DivRL under the multi-seed setting. 

ated by Flux-Kontext exhibit identity drift across different seeds, whereas our approach maintains consistent subject identity. 

E.3 Comparison with more baselines 

We provide an additional visual comparison between our method and other baseline models in Figure 11. These results demonstrate that our approach achieves superior subject identity consistency while simultaneously adhering to text prompts and maintaining high visual quality. 

F Scope and failure cases 

F.1 Scope analysis 

We provide a qualitative analysis on how nSSM responds to semantic/structural changes in Fig.12. When the semantics of the image are changing while the main foreground object remains the same, the nSSM score observes a medium increase. DivRL 23 Input           

> Flux
> IP -Adapter PaCo -RL OmniGen2
> Flux
> Kontext UNO DivRL
> “An ink sketch of a rustic
> boat tied to an old wooden
> dock”
> “A photo of a freshly glazed
> donut in a cozy bakery
> display”
> “A photo of a girl reading a
> newspaper in a cozy, sunlit
> corner of a cafe”
> “… steampunk style , with
> intricate bronze gears and
> steam pipes”
> “A watercolor painting of a
> man sailing a boat on a
> tranquil lake”
> “A photograph of a shark
> breaching the water's
> surface at dawn”
> “A photograph of a girl
> teaching in a brightly lit
> classroom”

Fig. 11: Comparison between multiple baseline models and our method DivRL. 

In contrast, when the structure (pose) of the main foreground object varies while the overall semantics say the same, the nSSM score has a sharper increase. nSSM score peaks when both structural and semantic changes exist. Therefore, despite being able to respond to both semantic and structural changes, nSSM is more sensitive to structural changes compared to the semantic ones, therefore encouraging more structural diversity in the RL finetuning stage. 

F.2 Failure cases 

We observe that our method occasionally produces high-frequency artifacts within the subject’s identity region, which is a phenomenon inherited from the base Flux-Kontext model as it is shown in Figure 13. We hypothesize that this stems from the conditioning mechanism, which provides a strong local signal and em-phasizes fine-grained visual features of the subject. During denoising, the model may over-amplify these signals, leading to high-frequency artifacts in the iden-tity region. While our 24 × 24 spatial bottleneck serves as a spectral low-pass 24 Q. Wang et al. Reference       

> Query images
> nSSM :0.075 0.108 0.183 0.422 0.481 0.505

Fig. 12: How nSSM responds to semantic/structural changes. Flux -Kontext  Ours   

> Ours Flux -Kontext
> “… sitting at a Cafe”
> “… reading a newspaper”

Fig. 13: Failure case: both the original Flux-Kontext model and our method may produce high-frequency noises of the identity region on the generated images. 

filter to mitigate the amplification of these artifacts during RL, we leave further architectural refinements for pixel-level visual fidelity to future work. Additionally, despite its robustness, our method occasionally struggles to achieve an optimal balance between prompt adherence and identity consistency (Figure 14). In some instances, the model may prioritize the textual context at the expense of the unique features of the subject, leading to a partial loss of identity preservation; In some other cases, the model may prioritize the identity preservation at the expense of faithful prompt alignment. Flux -Kontext  Ours  Flux -Kontext  Ours  

> “Elderly
> samurai …
> gazing at sun”
> “… Planting
> flowers”

Fig. 14: Failure case: our method occasionally exhibits a trade-off between prompt adherence and identity consistency.