Title: Do Not Leave a Gap: Hallucination-Free Object Concealment in Vision-Language Models

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2603.15940v1

Published Time: Wed, 18 Mar 2026 00:27:22 GMT

Number of Pages: 21

Markdown Content:
# Do Not Leave a Gap: Hallucination-Free Object Concealment in Vision-Language Models 

Amira Guesmi and Muhammad Shafique 

Engineering Division, New York University Abu Dhabi, UAE 

Abstract. Vision-language models (VLMs) have recently shown remark-able capabilities in visual understanding and generation, but remain vulnerable to adversarial manipulations of visual content. Prior object-hiding attacks primarily rely on suppressing or blocking region-specific representations, often creating semantic gaps that inadvertently induce hallucination, where models invent plausible but incorrect objects. In this work, we demonstrate that hallucination arises not from object absence per se, but from semantic discontinuity introduced by such suppression-based attacks. We propose a new class of background-consistent object concealment attacks, which hide target objects by re-encoding their vi-sual representations to be statistically and semantically consistent with surrounding background regions. Crucially, our approach preserves token structure and attention flow, avoiding representational voids that trig-ger hallucination. We present a pixel-level optimization framework that enforces background-consistent re-encoding across multiple transformer layers while preserving global scene semantics. Extensive experiments on state-of-the-art vision-language models show that our method effec-tively conceals target objects while preserving up to 86% of non-target objects and reducing grounded hallucination by up to 3× compared to attention-suppression-based attacks. Qualitative results further confirm that our approach maintains scene coherence and avoids spurious ob-ject insertion. Our findings highlight semantic continuity as a key factor in hallucination behavior and introduce a new direction for adversarial analysis of generative multimodal models. 

Keywords: VLM · Hallucination · Object concealment · Adversarial attacks 

## 1 Introduction 

Vision–Language Models (VLMs) have become foundational components in mod-ern AI systems, enabling image captioning, visual question answering, and mul-timodal reasoning [1,7,13]. As these models are increasingly deployed in sensitive settings, there is growing interest in object concealment and visual privacy at-tacks, where specific regions or objects in an image are intentionally hidden from the model’s perception while preserving the overall semantic integrity of the scene [6, 10, 12]. A dominant class of existing object concealment attacks operates by suppressing visual information corresponding to a target region,  

> arXiv:2603.15940v1 [cs.CR] 16 Mar 2026 2A. Guesmi et al.

for example by masking pixels, erasing patches, or explicitly reducing attention weights associated with region-of-interest (ROI) tokens [3,12,16]. While such ap-proaches can successfully prevent the direct recognition of the target object, they frequently induce a secondary and often overlooked failure mode: hallucination .When queried about the scene, the model compensates for missing visual evi-dence by inventing objects, attributes, or relationships that were never present in the original image [4, 9].        

> Fig. 1: Overview of Background-Consistent Re-encoding (BCR) . A pixel-level perturbation δis optimized to produce an adversarial image xadv from a clean image
> xwith a specified ROI. A frozen vision encoder extracts layer-wise hidden states, from which ROI and background tokens are identified via patch embedding. BCR enforces semantic continuity by (i) aligning ROI and background statistics, (ii) softly projecting ROI features onto background representations, and (iii) preserving background tokens between clean and adversarial images. A total variation regularizer encourages smooth perturbations. The objective is optimized across multiple transformer layers, while the language model remains frozen and is used only for evaluation.

This phenomenon is commonly treated as an unavoidable side effect of con-cealment. In contrast, we argue that hallucination is not an incidental artifact of object removal, but a direct consequence of semantic discontinuity introduced by suppression-based attacks. By aggressively attenuating or nullifying ROI rep-resentations, prior methods create representational gaps within the vision en-coder. These gaps propagate through cross-modal alignment layers, prompting the language model to infer missing semantics and fill them with plausible—but incorrect—content [9]. In this work, we propose a different perspective: effective object concealment should preserve the structural and statistical consistency of visual representations, even when the target object is hidden. Instead of remov-Title Suppressed Due to Excessive Length 3

ing ROI tokens or severing their influence, we aim to re-encode them such that they remain present but become indistinguishable from background content. Un-der this formulation, the global image representation remains coherent, reducing the incentive for the language model to hallucinate missing entities [3, 7]. To operationalize this idea, we introduce Background-Consistent Re-encoding (BCR) (see Figure 1), a pixel-level attack framework that conceals objects by aligning the internal representations of ROI tokens with background statistics across multiple layers of the vision transformer. BCR jointly enforces statistical similarity, dictionary-based projection onto background features, and preserva-tion of non-ROI content, resulting in adversarial images that hide target objects without introducing semantic gaps. Importantly, our approach operates directly in pixel space, requiring no modification of model parameters and remaining applicable to modern VLM architectures [5, 11]. This paper makes the following contributions: 

– We introduce Background-Consistent Re-encoding (BCR) , a novel object concealment paradigm that preserves token structure and attention flow while hiding target objects. 

– We propose a principled pixel-level optimization framework that enforces background-consistent visual representations across multiple vision trans-former layers. 

– We design hallucination-aware evaluation metrics and empirically demon-strate that BCR substantially reduces hallucination while maintaining strong concealment performance across multiple VLM architectures. 

## 2 Related Work 

2.1 Adversarial Attacks on Vision–Language Models 

Vision–language models (VLMs) have been shown to inherit and amplify adver-sarial vulnerabilities from their visual backbones while introducing new cross-modal failure modes. Early work adapted classical image-space attacks such as FGSM and PGD [5, 11] to multimodal architectures, demonstrating that small, imperceptible perturbations can significantly degrade image captioning and vi-sual question answering (VQA) performance [10, 16]. These studies established that multimodal grounding does not inherently confer robustness and that adver-sarial perturbations can propagate through cross-modal alignment layers to cor-rupt downstream language generation. Subsequent research has explored more structured attack strategies that explicitly exploit multimodal fusion mecha-nisms. While effective, these attacks generally aim to break the model’s predic-tions, often at the cost of destroying overall image semantics and utility. 

2.2 Adversarial Attacks for Privacy and Information Protection 

More recently, adversarial attacks have been explored as tools for privacy preser-vation. VIP (Visual Information Protection) [12] frames privacy as an adver-sarial objective and proposes selectively masking regions of interest (ROIs) by 4 A. Guesmi et al. 

suppressing attention and value activations in early vision layers, effectively pre-venting VLMs from recognizing sensitive content. VIP demonstrates strong con-cealment performance across multiple VLMs, but relies on explicit ROI suppres-sion, which creates a representational “gap” that can encourage the language model to hallucinate or infer missing content. Other methods explicitly manip-ulate internal representations rather than output tokens. For instance, PRM (Patch Representation Misalignment) [6] disrupts hierarchical patch represen-tations by enforcing feature divergence between clean and adversarial images, leading to global semantic corruption. However, these methods typically alter pixel-level appearance or remove information entirely, making them unsuitable for scenarios where global semantic coherence must be preserved. In contrast to prior work, our method does not suppress or erase visual information within the ROI. Instead, we propose Background-Consistent Re-encoding (BCR) manipulation, which reshapes the distributional relationship 

between ROI and background tokens inside the vision encoder. 

## 3 Threat Model 

We consider a white-box, image-level adversary targeting vision–language models (VLMs). The adversary is given access to the model architecture and parame-ters, and can compute gradients with respect to the visual input. The attack operates by applying a bounded perturbation to the input image at the pixel level, subject to an ℓ∞ norm constraint. The adversary is additionally provided with a region of interest (ROI), specified as a bounding box, corresponding to an object whose visual presence should be concealed. Such ROIs naturally arise from object detectors, annotations, or user-defined sensitive regions. The adversary’s objective is not to induce misclassification or nonsensical outputs, but rather to remove the semantic evidence of the target object from the model’s internal representation while preserving global visual coherence. Im-portantly, the attacker seeks to avoid introducing explicit visual artifacts or representational gaps that could trigger compensatory hallucinations by the language decoder. Unlike object removal or inpainting approaches, our objec-tive is not to alter the visual scene but to modulate representational grounding within the vision–language model. This enables privacy-preserving concealment while maintaining perceptual readability and evidentiary integrity for human ob-servers. The adversary does not modify the model weights, prompts, or decoding strategy, and has no control over the language model beyond its dependence on visual features. All evaluations are performed under this fixed threat model. 

## 4 Attack Principle 

Problem Setting. Vision–language models (VLMs) rely on a continuous visual representation to ground language generation, where aligned visual tokens pro-vide the evidential basis for downstream captioning and reasoning [1,7,13]. When Title Suppressed Due to Excessive Length 5

salient visual evidence is abruptly removed or heavily suppressed (e.g., via mask-ing, erasing, or zeroing localized regions), the model is forced to infer missing content from contextual priors encoded in the language decoder [9, 14]. This inference process frequently manifests as hallucination , where the model fabri-cates objects or attributes that are not visually present. Existing object-hiding or privacy-oriented attacks often rely on explicit removal or severe suppression of visual features corresponding to a target region [12, 16]. While effective at concealing the object itself, such approaches introduce a representational “gap” in the visual embedding space that the model attempts to compensate for during decoding, leading to unstable or hallucinated outputs [9]. This effect is particu-larly pronounced in large-scale VLMs, where strong language priors and gener-ative biases amplify missing or ambiguous visual evidence [9]. 

Principle of Background-Consistent Re-encoding (BCR). Instead of removing or suppressing the target object, we propose to re-encode its visual representation such that it becomes statistically and semantically consistent with the surround-ing background. The goal is not to erase information, but to blend the target region into the background feature manifold. Concretely, BCR enforces three complementary constraints: 

- Statistical alignment : The first- and second-order feature statistics of target-region tokens are matched to those of background tokens. 

- Dictionary consistency : Target-region features are reconstructed as convex combinations of background features, ensuring that they lie within the back-ground feature span. 

- Background preservation : Features outside the target region are explicitly preserved to prevent global degradation or collateral semantic drift. By maintaining continuity in the visual feature space, the global image repre-sentation remains coherent and does not signal missing content to the language decoder. As a result, the model neither mentions the concealed object nor com-pensates for its absence via hallucination. 

Contrast with Suppression-Based Attacks. Unlike masking- or suppression-based attacks (e.g., patch removal, attention blocking, or zeroing), BCR does not in-troduce visually or representationally empty regions. Instead, the target object is absorbed into the background representation. This distinction is critical: while suppression creates a void that invites hallucination, background-consistent re-encoding preserves representational smoothness and stabilizes downstream lan-guage generation. The resulting adversarial image conceals the target object while preserving global semantics and minimizing hallucinated content. Impor-tantly, BCR operates entirely at the representation level while being imple-mented via pixel-space optimization, making it applicable to black-box or frozen VLMs without modifying model parameters. 

## 5 Attack Formulation 

We consider a vision–language model (VLM) composed of a vision encoder fθ and a language decoder gϕ. Given an input image x ∈ R3×H×W , the vision encoder 6 A. Guesmi et al. 

produces a sequence of visual tokens Z = fθ (x) ∈ RT ×D, where the first token corresponds to a global representation (CLS) and the remaining tokens encode spatial image regions. The language decoder conditions on this representation to generate a caption or answer. Let R denote a target region of interest (ROI) corresponding to an object that the attacker wishes to conceal, specified by bounding boxes. Let Ir ⊂ { 1, . . . , T − 1} be the indices of visual tokens whose receptive fields intersect the ROI, and Ib the indices of background tokens. Our goal is to produce an adversarial image xadv that conceals the target object while preserving global semantic consistency and avoiding hallucination. 

5.1 Background-Consistent Re-encoding Objective 

Unlike suppression-based attacks that remove or mask ROI features, we aim to re-encode ROI tokens such that they become statistically and semantically indistinguishable from background tokens. Formally, we optimize the following objective: 

min 

> xadv

LBCR (xadv ) = X

> l∈L



λstat L(l)stat + λdict L(l)dict + λpres L(l)pres 



+ λtv Ltv , (1) subject to a pixel-level perturbation budget ∥xadv − x∥∞ ≤ ϵ. The losses are computed across a set of intermediate vision encoder layers L to enforce multi-level consistency. 

5.2 Statistical Alignment Loss 

To eliminate distributional discrepancies that could signal the presence of a con-cealed object, we align the first- and second-order statistics of ROI and back-ground features. For layer l, let Z(l) 

> r

= {z(l) 

> i

| i ∈ I r } and Z(l) 

> b

= {z(l) 

> j

| j ∈ I b}.We define: 

L(l)stat = μ(Z(l) 

> r

) − μ(Z(l) 

> b

) 22 + σ(Z(l) 

> r

) − σ(Z(l) 

> b

) 22, (2) where μ(·) and σ(·) denote per-dimension mean and standard deviation. This loss enforces that ROI features follow the same distribution as background features, preventing detectable anomalies. 

5.3 Dictionary Projection Loss 

While statistical alignment controls low-order moments, it does not ensure se-mantic consistency. To explicitly constrain ROI features to lie on the background feature manifold, we introduce a soft background projection loss. For each ROI token, we compute a soft assignment over background tokens using scaled dot-product similarity: α(l) 

> ij

= exp     

> 
> z(l)
> r,i ·z(l)
> b,j /τ
> P
> k∈I bexp
> 
> z(l)
> r,i ·z(l)
> b,k /τ
> 

. Each ROI feature is then pro-jected onto the background feature dictionary: ˆz(l) 

> r,i

= P 

> j∈I b

α(l) 

> ij

z(l) 

> b,j

.Title Suppressed Due to Excessive Length 7

The dictionary loss is defined as: 

L(l)dict = 1

|I r |

X

> i∈I r

z(l) 

> r,i

− ˆz(l)

> r,i
> 22

. (3) This loss encourages ROI tokens to be re-encoded as convex combinations of background features, enforcing semantic continuity without removing token structure. 

5.4 Background Preservation Loss 

To avoid global semantic drift and unintended distortions, we explicitly preserve background features by penalizing deviations from their clean counterparts: 

L(l)pres = 1

|I b|

X

> j∈I b

z(l) 

> b,j

(xadv ) − z(l) 

> b,j

(x) 22. (4) This constraint ensures that only the ROI representation is altered, while the remainder of the image remains perceptually and semantically stable. 

5.5 Pixel-Level Regularization 

Finally, we apply total variation regularization to encourage spatially smooth perturbations within the ROI: 

Ltv = X

> c,h,w

xadv  

> c,h,w +1

− xadv  

> c,h,w

+ xadv  

> c,h +1 ,w

− xadv  

> c,h,w

. (5) By jointly enforcing statistical alignment, dictionary-based semantic projec-tion, and background preservation across multiple layers, BCR removes object-specific information without introducing representational gaps. As a result, the global image representation remains coherent, preventing both object mention and compensatory hallucination during language generation. 

Why Representation Continuity Prevents Hallucination. Vision–language mod-els rely on the assumption that visual token representations form a continuous and semantically coherent manifold. During generation, the language decoder implicitly performs inference over this manifold: when a region-specific signal is missing or anomalous, the decoder compensates by extrapolating from learned visual–semantic priors, often resulting in hallucinated content. This behavior is particularly pronounced in suppression-based attacks, where masking, zeroing, or attention blocking creates a representational “gap” that violates the continu-ity assumptions learned during pretraining. Our attack avoids this failure mode by enforcing representation continuity rather than suppression. By re-encoding ROI tokens to match the statistical distribution and semantic span of back-ground tokens, we ensure that the visual embedding remains locally smooth and globally consistent. From the decoder’s perspective, the ROI does not appear 8 A. Guesmi et al. 

as missing information, but as background-consistent evidence. Consequently, there is no incentive for the model to hypothesize or hallucinate alternative objects to explain an apparent void. Importantly, this continuity is enforced across multiple layers of the vision encoder, preventing object semantics from re-emerging through higher-level abstractions or cross-token interactions. Thus, hallucination is reduced not by restricting generation, but by eliminating repre-sentational discontinuities that would otherwise trigger compensatory reasoning in the language model. 

## 6 Evaluation Metrics 

Evaluating object concealment attacks on vision–language models requires more than measuring caption similarity or task accuracy. A successful concealment attack must simultaneously (i) remove evidence of a target object, (ii) preserve non-target visual semantics, and (iii) avoid inducing hallucinated content. To capture these distinct objectives, we introduce a set of complementary evaluation metrics combining caption analysis with grounded visual verification. 

Object Sets. Given a clean image I and its adversarial counterpart I′, we generate captions c = f (I) and c′ = f (I′) using the same prompting strategy. From each caption, we extract a set of object-like tokens using a dependency-based noun phrase parser: 

O(c), O(c′).

All object strings are normalized (lemmatized and lowercased) prior to compar-ison. 

Concealment Success. Concealment Success measures whether the target ob-ject is successfully removed from the adversarial caption. Let o∗ denote the target object. We define: 

ConcealmentSuccess = ⊮o∗ ∈ O (c) ∧ o∗ /∈ O (c′). (6) This metric isolates the primary attack objective independently of other caption changes. 

Global Preservation. Global Preservation measures how well non-target visual content is retained. It is defined as the fraction of clean-caption objects that remain present after the attack: 

GlobalPreservation = |O (c) ∩ O (c′)||O (c)| . (7) A high preservation score indicates that the attack does not indiscriminately erase visual semantics. 

Grounded Hallucination Rate. Caption-level comparison alone cannot de-termine whether newly mentioned objects are visually supported. To address this limitation, we introduce a grounded hallucination metric that verifies adversarial caption objects against visual evidence using an external grounding model. Title Suppressed Due to Excessive Length 9

Let H = O(c′) \ O (c) denote the set of newly introduced objects in the adversarial caption. For each object h ∈ H , we query a grounding model (GLIP [8]) to determine whether the object can be visually localized in the image. Formally, let 

detect (h, I ′) = 

(

1 if the grounding model localizes object h with confidence > τ, 

0 otherwise. 

Objects that cannot be grounded are considered hallucinated. The grounded hallucination rate is defined as: 

GroundedHallucinationRate = |{ h ∈ H | detect (h, I ′) = 0 }| |O (c′)| . (8) This formulation ensures that hallucination is measured relative to actual visual evidence rather than only caption differences. 

Head-Noun Grounded Hallucination. To account for paraphrasing and compound nouns (e.g., “salt shaker” vs. “shaker” ), we additionally report a head-noun grounded hallucination rate. Each object phrase is reduced to its syntactic head noun prior to grounding verification, yielding a more semantically robust estimate. 

Semantic Drift. While hallucination focuses on unsupported object introduc-tion, Semantic Drift measures global caption deviation. Using a text embed-ding function ϕ(·) (e.g., a sentence encoder), we compute: SemanticDrift = 1 −

cos  ϕ(c), ϕ (c′). This metric ensures that reduced hallucination is not achieved by collapsing captions into generic or uninformative descriptions. Together, these metrics provide a fine-grained evaluation of concealment attacks. Unlike CHAIR [14] and related hallucination metrics [9], which assume static object presence and operate at coarse category granularity, our approach explic-itly evaluates grounded object support and is designed for adversarial object concealment scenarios. 

## 7 Experimental Setup 

7.1 Models 

To evaluate the effectiveness and generality of our attack, we consider three widely used vision–language models (VLMs) with distinct architectural designs: LLaVA-1.5 which combines a CLIP-based visual encoder with the Vicuna-7B large language model, BLIP-2 paired with the Flan-T5-XL language model via a Q-Former alignment module, and InstructBLIP which also employs a Vicuna-7B language model with instruction-tuned visual–language alignment. These models have been extensively adopted in prior work on adversarial attacks and robust-ness evaluation for VLMs [6, 10, 12]. They represent diverse design choices in terms of visual encoders, cross-modal fusion mechanisms, and decoding strate-gies. For brevity, we refer to these models as LLaVA, BLIP2-T5, and Instruct-BLIP throughout the remainder of the paper. 10 A. Guesmi et al. 

7.2 Datasets 

We evaluate our attack on two standard large-scale vision datasets with object-level annotations. ImageNet: We randomly sample 1,000 images from the Im-ageNet validation set [15]. For each image, we treat a ground-truth bounding box as the region of interest (ROI) and define the attack objective as preventing the VLM from detecting or describing the object within this region. COCO: In addition, we evaluate our method on images from the COCO dataset [2], which contains complex multi-object scenes with diverse object categories and spatial layouts. COCO allows us to assess the robustness of our attack under more chal-lenging conditions, including overlapping objects and crowded scenes. As with ImageNet, ground-truth bounding boxes are used to define ROIs, and the attack targets a single object category per image while preserving the remaining scene content. 

7.3 Implementation Details 

Unless otherwise stated, all experiments use a perturbation budget of ϵ = 0 .2.The loss weights are set to λstat = 1 , λdict = 1 , λpres = 1 , and λtv = 10 −3,with a temperature parameter τ = 0 .07 . BCR is applied to later vision trans-former layers. Specifically, we optimize layers {22 , 23 , 24 , 25 } for Instruct-BLIP, 

{21 , 22 , 23 , 24 } for LLaVA, and {22 , 23 , 24 , 25 } for BLIP2-T5. For BLIP-2, we apply BCR losses to the frozen ViT-g/14 vision encoder, prior to the Q-Former bottleneck. We do not operate on Q-Former tokens, as they discard spatial cor-respondence. The choice of targeted layers is discussed in Appendix B. 

Baselines We compare our BCR attack against attention-suppression-based concealment methods, including VIP. All baseline methods are implemented us-ing their official or publicly available code and evaluated under the same threat model and perturbation budget. 

Caption Generation and Prompts. For caption-based evaluation, we adopt the same prompts used in VIP, including: “Describe this picture.” For bi-nary verification tasks, we use object-specific yes/no prompts (e.g., “Is there a {object} in the image?” ). All captions are generated using greedy decoding with a fixed maximum token budget. 

Evaluation Protocol. Each attack is evaluated using the metrics introduced in Section 6, including Concealment Success, Global Preservation, Hallucination Rate, and Semantic Drift. Results are reported as averages over all test images and target objects. To isolate the effect of object concealment, all comparisons between clean and adversarial images are performed using identical prompts and decoding settings. Further details and algorithm are presented in Appendix A. 

## 8 Main Results 

We evaluate our Background-Consistent Re-encoding (BCR) attack against ex-isting ROI-based suppression methods, with a particular focus on object conceal-ment effectiveness, grounded hallucination behavior, and semantic consistency. Title Suppressed Due to Excessive Length 11 

All results are averaged over the evaluation set described in Section 7. Table 1 summarizes the main quantitative results across three vision–language models. While both VIP and BCR achieve high object concealment rates, their failure modes differ substantially. VIP relies on suppressing attention and value flow from the ROI tokens, which frequently introduces a semantic gap in the vi-sual representation. This disruption weakens the visual grounding available to the language model. As a result, the model often compensates by generating plausible but visually unsupported objects, leading to a high grounded halluci-nation rate and increased semantic drift. In contrast, BCR achieves comparable concealment performance while substantially reducing grounded hallucinations. Instead of suppressing ROI tokens, BCR re-encodes them to be statistically and semantically consistent with surrounding background tokens. This preserves rep-resentational continuity in the visual encoder and prevents the emergence of anomalous feature patterns that trigger compensatory language generation. The improvements are consistent across models and datasets. For example, on Ima-geNet with Instruct-BLIP, BCR reduces grounded hallucination from 0.43 (VIP) to 0.19 while increasing global preservation from 0.57 to 0.81 . Similar trends are observed across BLIP2-T5 and LLaVA, as well as on the more complex COCO scenes. These results suggest that hallucination under concealment attacks is closely tied to representational discontinuity. By maintaining feature-level continuity rather than removing information outright, BCR enables effective object hiding while preserving coherent scene understanding. 

Table 1: Multi-model evaluation on ImageNet and COCO subsets. C: Concealment success, GP : Global Preservation, GH : Grounded Hallucination rate (lower is better), 

SD : Semantic Drift.                                                                                                                                                  

> Dataset Method Instruct-BLIP BLIP2-T5 LLaVA C↑GP ↑GH ↓SD ↓C↑GP ↑GH ↓SD ↓C↑GP ↑GH ↓SD ↓
> ImageNet
> No Attack 0.00 1.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 1.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 1.00 0.00 0.00 Masking 1.00 0.41 0.59 0.54 1.00 0.52 0.48 0.40 1.00 0.55 0.45 0.41 PRM 0.66 0.38 0.62 0.44 0.70 0.31 0.69 0.41 0.73 0.34 0.66 0.39 VIP 0.93 0.57 0.43 0.35 0.96 0.59 0.41 0.32 0.98 0.62 0.48 0.29
> BCR (Ours) 0.92 0.81 0.19 0.13 0.95 0.83 0.17 0.10 0.98 0.86 0.14 0.08 COCO
> No Attack 0.00 1.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 1.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 1.00 0.00 0.00 Masking 1.00 0.37 0.63 0.46 1.00 0.39 0.61 0.44 1.00 0.41 0.59 0.41 PRM 0.63 0.54 0.46 0.37 0.77 0.58 0.42 0.34 0.80 0.60 0.40 0.33 VIP 0.80 0.42 0.58 0.48 0.83 0.45 0.55 0.45 0.88 0.48 0.52 0.43
> BCR (Ours) 0.89 0.77 0.23 0.16 0.92 0.79 0.21 0.13 0.95 0.82 0.18 0.11

8.1 Qualitative Comparison with Attention Suppression 

We present qualitative comparisons between our Background-Consistent Re-encoding (BCR) attack and attention-suppression-based methods such as VIP. Figure 2 shows representative examples where the target object lies within the annotated region of interest (ROI). For each case, we report the clean caption together with captions generated after applying VIP and BCR. 12 A. Guesmi et al. 

In the first example, both methods successfully conceal the target person. However, VIP substantially alters the global scene description, introducing un-related objects such as a fire hydrant and describing the scene as an abstract painting. This behavior reflects a common failure mode of attention suppression: by removing the contribution of ROI tokens, the visual representation becomes incomplete, prompting the language model to hallucinate visually unsupported content. In contrast, BCR removes the person while preserving the surround-ing visual context. The generated caption continues to reference grounded el-ements of the scene, such as the pigeons and park bench, without introducing spurious objects. The second example highlights a different failure mode. VIP  

> Fig. 2: Qualitative comparison of object concealment attacks on InstructBLIP.

again removes the target object but produces a caption describing an unrelated fireworks scene, which bears little resemblance to the underlying image. This reflects severe semantic drift caused by the disruption of the visual representa-tion. In contrast, BCR replaces the concealed object with a visually plausible marine entity (a sea urchin). Although this represents a semantic substitution rather than a strict omission, the resulting description remains consistent with the visual environment (coral reef and marine background) and does not in-troduce unrelated objects. Across examples, attention suppression often creates a representational void that the language model compensates for by generat-ing plausible but visually unsupported content. BCR mitigates this effect by preserving representational continuity within the visual encoder. Instead of re-moving ROI tokens, BCR re-encodes them to align with the statistical structure of surrounding background tokens. This prevents anomalous feature patterns that would otherwise trigger compensatory hallucination during language gen-eration. Overall, BCR consistently conceals the target object while maintaining coherent scene descriptions, favoring contextually grounded substitutions over Title Suppressed Due to Excessive Length 13 

hallucinated or unrelated content. Additional qualitative results are provided in Appendix C. 

8.2 Comparison with Pixel-Space Obfuscation Baselines 

Beyond attention-suppression attacks, another class of concealment baselines op-erates directly in pixel space, including blurring , masking , and inpainting of the target region. These techniques are widely used in visual privacy and anonymiza-tion, as they remove explicit visual evidence of the target object. However, their interaction with vision–language models can introduce unintended semantic arti-facts. Figure 3 shows representative examples. When the target region is blurred or masked, the resulting image often contains ambiguous or unnatural patterns that the vision encoder struggles to interpret. As a result, the language model at-tempts to explain these signals by generating plausible but visually unsupported descriptions. For example, in a scene originally depicting chickens near a fence, pixel-space obfuscation leads the model to hallucinate unrelated objects such as dogs or cows. This illustrates a key limitation of pixel-space concealment: remov-ing visual evidence alone can introduce ambiguity that triggers compensatory reasoning in the language model, resulting in hallucinated scene interpretations.  

> Fig. 3: Failure cases of pixel-space obfuscation methods. When the target object is masked or blurred, the resulting visual artifacts introduce ambiguous signals that vision–language models attempt to explain. Despite the absence of the original ob-ject, the model generates hallucinated descriptions containing unrelated entities such as dogs or cows.

8.3 Perceptual Fidelity 

In addition to semantic preservation, effective object concealment should main-tain high visual fidelity so that perturbations remain unobtrusive. We there-fore measure perceptual similarity between clean and adversarial images using Structural Similarity (SSIM) and Learned Perceptual Image Patch Similarity (LPIPS). Table 2 shows that BCR consistently achieves higher SSIM and lower LPIPS across models compared to attention-suppression attacks. 14 A. Guesmi et al. 

Table 2: Perceptual fidelity between clean and adver-sarial images. Higher SSIM and lower LPIPS indicate better visual similarity.                                  

> Model Instruct-BLIP BLIP2-T5 LLaVA Method SSIM ↑LPIPS ↓SSIM ↑LPIPS ↓SSIM ↑LPIPS ↓
> PRM 0.93 0.06 0.93 0.06 0.92 0.07 VIP 0.71 0.34 0.804 0.175 0.65 0.32
> BCR (Ours) 0.96 0.02 0.95 0.03 0.94 0.04

Although BCR modifies pix-els within the ROI, the per-turbations remain visually coherent with surrounding content, avoiding the arti-facts commonly introduced by suppression-based meth-ods. These results indicate that BCR preserves both se-mantic consistency and per-ceptual realism, producing adversarial images that remain visually close to the original inputs. 

## 9 Ablation Study 

Table 3: Ablation study of BCR components on Instruct-BLIP. ✓

indicates the loss term is enabled. We report Concealment Success (CS ↑), Hallucination Rate (HR ↓), and Global Preservation (GP ↑).                                       

> Lstat Ldict Lpres Ltv CS ↑HR ↓GP ↑
> ✓✓✓✓0.91 0.08 0.83
> ✓✓✓0.90 0.09 0.81
> ✓✓✓0.86 0.17 0.69
> ✓✓✓0.79 0.21 0.74
> ✓✓✓0.72 0.28 0.66 VIP-style suppression baseline 0.88 0.42 0.51

We conduct an ablation study to isolate the contribution of each component in BCR. All variants are evaluated on the same images and ROIs with identical optimization and evaluation settings. Table 3 shows that the full objective achieves the best balance be-tween concealment success and semantic sta-bility. Removing either the statistical align-ment loss ( Lstat ) or the dictionary projec-tion loss ( Ldict ) substantially increases hallu-cination, indicating that both distributional matching and semantic anchoring are nec-essary for stable representations. Similarly, disabling background preservation ( Lpres ) de-grades global semantics, reducing GP scores. Overall, the results confirm that BCR’s effec-tiveness stems from enforcing representational continuity at both statistical and semantic levels. 

## 10 Conclusion 

We introduced Background-Consistent Re-encoding (BCR), a continuity-preserving attack that conceals target objects in vision–language models without inducing hallucination. By re-encoding ROI features to align with surrounding context, BCR maintains representational continuity and scene coherence. Our results sug-gest that hallucination arises largely from representational discontinuities rather than object absence itself. This insight highlights continuity-aware manipulation as a promising direction for adversarial analysis and robust multimodal percep-tion. Title Suppressed Due to Excessive Length 15 

## References 

1. Alayrac, J.B., Donahue, J., Luc, P., Miech, A., Barr, I., Hasson, Y., Lenc, K., Men-sch, A., Millican, K., Reynolds, M., et al.: Flamingo: a visual language model for few-shot learning. Advances in neural information processing systems 35 , 23716– 23736 (2022) 1, 4 2. Caesar, H., Uijlings, J., Ferrari, V.: Coco-stuff: Thing and stuff classes in context. In: Proceedings of the IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern recognition. pp. 1209–1218 (2018) 10 3. Dai, W., Li, J., Li, D., Tiong, A., Zhao, J., Wang, W., Li, B., Fung, P.N., Hoi, S.: Instructblip: Towards general-purpose vision-language models with instruction tuning. Advances in neural information processing systems 36 , 49250–49267 (2023) 2, 3 4. Datta, S., Sundararaman, D.: Evaluating hallucination in large vision-language models based on context-aware object similarities. arXiv preprint arXiv:2501.15046 (2025) 2 5. Goodfellow, I.J., Shlens, J., Szegedy, C.: Explaining and harnessing adversarial examples. arXiv preprint arXiv:1412.6572 (2014) 3 6. Hu, A., Gu, J., Pinto, F., Kamnitsas, K., Torr, P.: As firm as their foundations: Can open-sourced foundation models be used to create adversarial examples for downstream tasks? arXiv preprint arXiv:2403.12693 (2024) 1, 4, 9 7. Li, J., Li, D., Savarese, S., Hoi, S.: Blip-2: Bootstrapping language-image pre-training with frozen image encoders and large language models. In: International conference on machine learning. pp. 19730–19742. PMLR (2023) 1, 3, 4 8. Li, L.H., Zhang, P., Zhang, H., Yang, J., Li, C., Zhong, Y., Wang, L., Yuan, L., Zhang, L., Hwang, J.N., Chang, K.W., Gao, J.: Grounded language-image pre-training (2022), https://arxiv.org/abs/2112.03857 99. Liu, H., Xue, W., Chen, Y., Chen, D., Zhao, X., Wang, K., Hou, L., Li, R., Peng, W.: A survey on hallucination in large vision-language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2402.00253 (2024) 2, 5, 9 10. Luo, H., Gu, J., Liu, F., Torr, P.: An image is worth 1000 lies: Adversarial transfer-ability across prompts on vision-language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2403.09766 (2024) 1, 3, 9 11. Madry, A., Makelov, A., Schmidt, L., Tsipras, D., Vladu, A.: Towards deep learning models resistant to adversarial attacks. arXiv preprint arXiv:1706.06083 (2017) 3 12. Meftah, H.F., Hamidouche, W., Fezza, S.A., Déforges, O.: Vip: Visual information protection through adversarial attacks on vision-language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2507.08982 (2025) 1, 2, 3, 5, 9 13. Radford, A., Kim, J.W., Hallacy, C., Ramesh, A., Goh, G., Agarwal, S., Sastry, G., Askell, A., Mishkin, P., Clark, J., et al.: Learning transferable visual models from natural language supervision. In: International conference on machine learning. pp. 8748–8763. PmLR (2021) 1, 4 14. Rohrbach, A., Hendricks, L.A., Burns, K., Darrell, T., Saenko, K.: Object halluci-nation in image captioning. arXiv preprint arXiv:1809.02156 (2018) 5, 9 15. Russakovsky, O., Deng, J., Su, H., Krause, J., Satheesh, S., Ma, S., Huang, Z., Karpathy, A., Khosla, A., Bernstein, M., et al.: Imagenet large scale visual recog-nition challenge. International journal of computer vision 115 (3), 211–252 (2015) 10 16. Zhang, T., Wang, L., Zhang, X., Zhang, Y., Jia, B., Liang, S., Hu, S., Fu, Q., Liu, A., Liu, X.: Visual adversarial attack on vision-language models for autonomous driving. arXiv preprint arXiv:2411.18275 (2024) 2, 3, 5 16 A. Guesmi et al. 

## A. Additional Implentation Details 

A.1. Algorithm Overview 

Algorithm 1 summarizes the proposed Background-Consistent Re-encoding (BCR) attack. Given an input image and a region of interest (ROI), the algorithm opti-mizes a pixel-level adversarial image under a bounded perturbation budget. At each iteration, visual features are extracted from selected layers of the vision encoder. ROI token representations are then encouraged to (i) match the first-and second-order statistics of background tokens, (ii) lie within the background feature manifold via soft dictionary projection, and (iii) preserve non-ROI fea-tures to maintain global scene semantics. A total variation regularizer enforces spatial smoothness of the perturbation. The optimization proceeds via gradient descent in pixel space, producing an adversarial image that conceals the target object while preserving semantic continuity and reducing hallucination. 

Algorithm 1 Background-Consistent Re-encoding (BCR) 

Require: Image x, ROI boxes B, vision encoder fθ , layers L, step size η, steps T ,perturbation budget ϵ

Ensure: Adversarial image xadv 

1: Compute ROI pixel mask M from B

2: Compute ROI token indices Ir and background indices Ib

3: Initialize xadv ← x

4: for each layer l ∈ L do 

5: Store clean features Z(l)(x)

6: end for 

7: for t = 1 to T do 

8: for each layer l ∈ L do 

9: Extract ROI features Z(l) 

> r

and background features Z(l)

> b

10: Compute statistical loss L(l)stat 

11: Compute dictionary projection loss L(l)dict 

12: Compute background preservation loss L(l)pres 

13: end for 

14: Compute total variation loss Ltv on ROI 15: L ← P

> l∈L

 λstat L(l)stat + λdict L(l)dict + λpres L(l)pres 

 + λtv Ltv 

16: Update xadv using gradient descent on L

17: Project perturbation to ℓ∞ budget ϵ

18: end for 

19: return xadv 

A.2. Grounded Hallucination Verification with GLIP 

To ensure that hallucination measurements reflect the presence of visually un-supported objects rather than linguistic variation, we augment our caption-based evaluation with a grounding-based verification step. Title Suppressed Due to Excessive Length 17 

Caption comparison alone can overestimate hallucination due to paraphras-ing or synonym usage. For example, an object may appear in a caption under a different lexical form (e.g., “automobile” vs. “car”). Conversely, models may introduce object terms that are not visually supported in the image. To disam-biguate these cases, we verify whether newly mentioned objects can be grounded in the image. Given a clean image I and its adversarial counterpart I′, we generate captions 

c = f (I) and c′ = f (I′) using the same prompt and decoding settings. Object candidates are extracted from both captions using a dependency-based noun phrase parser. After lemmatization and normalization, we obtain the object sets 

O(c), O(c′).

The set of newly introduced objects is defined as 

Hcand = O(c′) \ O(c).

For each candidate object o ∈ Hcand , we query the Grounded Language–Image Pretraining (GLIP) detector to verify whether the object can be localized in the adversarial image I′. GLIP predicts bounding boxes conditioned on the textual query corresponding to the object name. If no detection with confidence above a predefined threshold τg is produced, the object is considered visually unsup-ported. Formally, the hallucination set is defined as 

H = { o ∈ Hcand | GLIP (I′, o ) = ∅ }.

Using the verified hallucination set H, we compute the grounded hallucina-tion rate as 

HallucinationRate grounded = |H||O(c′)| .

This metric measures the fraction of objects mentioned in the adversarial caption that cannot be visually grounded in the image. We use a publicly available GLIP model pretrained on large-scale grounding datasets. The grounding confidence threshold is set to τg = 0 .3. For multi-word phrases, the head noun is used as the textual query to improve grounding ro-bustness. This grounding-based verification reduces ambiguity in hallucination evaluation by ensuring that newly introduced object tokens correspond to de-tectable visual evidence. By combining caption-based object extraction with grounding verification, the evaluation more accurately captures hallucinations caused by adversarial manipulation rather than lexical variation. 

## B. Sensitivity Analysis of Targeted Transformer Layers 

Our Background-Consistent Re-encoding (BCR) objective enforces statistical and semantic alignment between region-of-interest (ROI) tokens and background 18 A. Guesmi et al. 

tokens across a subset of vision transformer layers. The choice of targeted layers influences the strength and stability of the concealment attack, as different layers encode visual information at varying levels of abstraction. Early layers of vision transformers primarily capture low-level features such as edges, textures, and local patterns, while deeper layers encode higher-level se-mantic representations that are more directly aligned with language generation. Consequently, applying the BCR objective at different depths may affect the de-gree to which object semantics are suppressed or redistributed into background representations.  

> Fig. 4: Sensitivity analysis of targeted transformer layers. Early-layer optimization leaves object semantics largely intact, allowing the model to still recognize the target object. In contrast, targeting deeper layers removes the object semantics while preserv-ing the surrounding scene context, resulting in successful concealment.

To study this effect, we evaluate BCR by applying the alignment losses to different groups of transformer layers: 

– Early layers : losses applied to the first four transformer blocks. 

– Middle layers : losses applied to intermediate transformer blocks. 

– Late layers : losses applied to the final four transformer blocks. All other hyperparameters remain identical to the main experiments, includ-ing the perturbation budget and optimization schedule. Title Suppressed Due to Excessive Length 19 

We additionally measured concealment success and hallucination rate across layer configurations, confirming that targeting deeper layers yields the most sta-ble concealment behavior. Early-layer optimization leaves object semantics in-tact, allowing the model to still recognize the target object. In contrast, target-ing deeper layers removes the object semantics while preserving the surrounding scene context.           

> Table 4: Quantitative sensitivity analysis of targeted transformer layers on Instruct-BLIP. Later-layer optimization yields stronger concealment and lower hallucination.
> Targeted Layers Concealment Success ↑Hallucination Rate ↓
> Early Layers 0.22 0.07 Middle Layers 0.41 0.11 Late Layers 0.91 0.18

These results indicate that hallucination and object recognition in vision– language models are primarily driven by higher-level semantic representations. By aligning ROI features with background features in deeper layers, BCR effec-tively removes object-specific semantics while preserving global scene coherence. Based on this analysis, all experiments in the main paper apply the BCR objec-tive to later transformer layers of the vision encoder. 

## C. Additional Qualitative Results 

We present additional qualitative examples illustrating the behavior of BCR across different scenes and target objects (see Figure 5). For each example, we compare captions generated from the clean image and the adversarial images produced by different concealment strategies. Across diverse scenes, suppression-based approaches frequently produce un-stable descriptions. Because these methods remove or weaken ROI representa-tions, the resulting visual features become semantically inconsistent with the surrounding context. The language model then compensates by generating plau-sible but unsupported objects, leading to hallucinated descriptions. In contrast, BCR maintains representational continuity by re-encoding ROI tokens to match the statistical and semantic properties of background tokens. As a result, the generated captions remain visually grounded and coherent, even after the target object is concealed. These additional examples further demonstrate that hallucination in vision– language models is closely tied to representational discontinuities introduced by suppression-based attacks, while continuity-preserving manipulation enables more stable and realistic scene descriptions. 20 A. Guesmi et al. 

Fig. 5: Additional qualitative comparisons between suppression-based attacks and BCR. While suppression-based methods often introduce hallucinated or semantically unrelated objects, BCR consistently removes the target object while preserving the overall scene structure and contextual elements. Title Suppressed Due to Excessive Length 21 

## D. Failure Cases and Limitations 

While BCR substantially reduces hallucination compared to suppression-based attacks, it is not without limitations. We summarize the main failure modes observed in our experiments and discuss directions for future improvement. 

Partial Semantic Substitution. In some cases, BCR does not fully eliminate object-level reasoning but instead induces semantic substitution . For example, small or visually ambiguous objects (e.g., accessories such as ties or utensils) may be re-encoded as semantically adjacent background objects (e.g., clothing regions or tableware). Although this behavior avoids hallucination, it may still allow indirect inference of the concealed object category through contextual cues. This limitation is inherent to continuity-preserving attacks that aim to maintain global coherence rather than explicitly erase object evidence. 

Model-Specific Vision Tokenization. Different VLMs employ distinct vision back-bones and tokenization strategies (e.g., patch size, cropping, or pooling), which can affect ROI-to-token alignment. While BCR generalizes across LLaVA, BLIP-2, and Instruct-BLIP, additional model-specific adjustments may be required for architectures with aggressive image cropping or non-uniform token layouts. 

Scope of Concealment. BCR is designed to conceal objects while preserving over-all scene semantics, not to guarantee absolute object removal under all possible queries. Highly targeted or adversarial prompts explicitly probing the ROI (e.g., repeated yes/no questioning) may still extract residual information. Addressing such interactive threat models remains an open problem. Overall, these limitations highlight the inherent trade-off between conceal-ment and semantic continuity. We believe BCR represents a principled step toward hallucination-aware adversarial attacks, and future work may combine continuity-based objectives with prompt-aware or adaptive strategies to further strengthen object concealment.