Title: Generative Testing of Automated Speech Recognition Systems

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2607.09833v1

Published Time: Tue, 14 Jul 2026 00:06:43 GMT

Number of Pages: 12

Markdown Content:
# Generative Testing of Automated Speech Recognition Systems 

# Yanis Xabier Wilbrand Peña 

Technical University of Munich Germany 

# Oliver Weißl 

o.weissl@tum.de Technical University of Munich Germany 

# Andrea Stocco 

andrea.stocco@tum.de Technical University of Munich & fortiss GmbH Germany 

## Abstract 

Automatic speech recognition (ASR) systems have achieved high accuracy with transformer-based models, enabling deployment in critical applications. However, they remain vulnerable to adver-sarial manipulation, particularly in black-box settings where at-tacks must preserve perceptual naturalness. This work introduces GATAS, a black-box testing approach that generates failure induc-ing inputs by operating in the phoneme-level latent space of a text-to-speech model. Instead of perturbing waveforms directly, the ap-proach interpolates latent representations to induce transcription errors while remaining within the manifold of natural speech. The attack is formulated as a multi-objective optimization problem bal-ancing semantic divergence and perceptual quality. Our empirical evaluation against both white-box and black-box baselines shows that GATAS achieves a 98% success rate while producing lower dis-tortion and higher perceptual quality, as confirmed by human stud-ies. Despite operating without gradient access, GATAS remains competitive against white-box methods, highlighting that repre-sentation and perceptual alignment are more critical than access to model internals. Overall, our results demonstrate that untargeted latent-space optimization enables the efficient generation of real-istic and effective test cases for ASR systems. 

## 1 Introduction 

Automatic speech recognition (ASR) has become a central inter-face between humans and machines, enabling applications such as voice assistants, transcription services, and accessibility tools [2]. Recent transformer-based models, including Whisper [38], have reached performance levels that support deployment in high-stakes settings such as medical documentation, legal proceedings, and security-critical environments [29, 47]. This increased reliance de-mands systematic testing, as learning-enabled systems such as ASR are vulnerable to subtle input variations that can lead to incor-rect behavior [23, 42]. In particular, adversarial manipulation has shown that benign-sounding speech can be modified to induce incorrect transcriptions without introducing perceptible artifacts, raising the question of whether ASR systems behave reliably not only under nominal conditions, but also under realistic, hard-to-detect variations of valid inputs. Prior work has demonstrated the feasibility of adversarial at-tacks on ASR systems under both white-box and black-box assump-tions, but with important limitations. White-box approaches [13] rely on gradient access to the target model, which restricts their ap-plicability in real-world deployments. Black-box methods typically operate in waveform space, where perturbations tend to introduce audible distortions [4, 50]. Transfer-based approaches avoid itera-tive querying but require training surrogate models [16], and the resulting adversarial audio still contains perceptible artifacts. In both cases, audio quality is treated as a secondary concern rather than an explicit optimization objective. While black-box attacks on ASR are well studied, methods that generate audio preserving both similarity to the original utterance and naturalness while induc-ing semantic divergence in the transcription remain limited. This gap motivates testing approaches that operate within a structured representation space rather than applying unconstrained perturba-tions to the raw audio signal. To address this gap, this work proposes GATAS ( Gener ative 

Testing of Automatic Speech Recognition Systems), a novel black-box testing approach for ASR systems that generates natural-sounding audio while altering transcription semantics. GATAS leverages a text-to-speech (TTS) model, specifically StyleTTS2 [31], which rep-resents speech as phoneme-level embedding vectors encoding acous-tic properties. Instead of modifying the waveform directly, the ap-proach interpolates between the ground-truth phoneme embed-dings and a noise reference, with a per-phoneme scalar weight con-trolling the degree of perturbation. This shifts individual phoneme realizations while the TTS decoder ensures that the generated au-dio remains natural-sounding. GATAS formulates test generation as a multi-objective optimization problem that balances semantic divergence against perturbation imperceptibility, enabling the dis-covery of test cases that induce meaningful transcription changes while preserving audio quality. Our empirical study uses the Harvard Sentences corpus [44] and targets Whisper [38], a modern end-to-end encoder–decoder transformer-based ASR system. To assess the impact of the inter-polation domain, we compare GATAS against a set of represen-tative baselines covering both black-box and white-box settings. In particular, we include a waveform-based variant that adopts the same multi-objective optimization setup as GATAS but per-forms interpolation directly between the ground-truth audio and Gaussian noise, thereby isolating the choice of search space as the only experimental variable. We further consider SMACK [57], a black-box method combining genetic search with gradient estima-tion over prosodic feature representations, which we adapt from its original targeted formulation to an untargeted setting. Finally, we include PGD [36], a white-box gradient-based attack, as a ref-erence point approximating the performance achievable with full access to model internals. Our evaluation considers three aspects: (i) effectiveness, measured by semantic divergence and perturba-tion imperceptibility; (ii) validity, assessed through human evalua-tion of intelligibility and naturalness; and (iii) efficiency, quantified by query budget and runtime. The results of our empirical study show that embedding-space manipulation achieves high combined success in finding misbehav-ior inducing inputs while balancing semantic divergence and audio arXiv:2607.09833v1 [cs.CR] 10 Jul 2026 Conference’17, July 2017, Washington, DC, USA Trovato et al. 

quality simultaneously. GATAS achieves a success rate of 98% com-pared to 99% for the WavefoRm baseline, 100% for SMACK, and 100% for PGD. The WavefoRm baseline achieves semantic diver-gence only through signal destruction, and SMACK, originally de-signed for pre-transformer ASR systems such as DeepSpeech2 [5], exhibits similarly degraded performance on Whisper. PGD achieves comparable audio quality to the proposed method, as expected given full gradient access, but requires white-box access unavail-able in practical deployment. Human evaluation confirms these findings: GATAS achieves mean technical quality ratings of 4.81 vs. 4.92 for ground truth, and mean semantic quality ratings of 3.86 vs. 4.01 for ground truth, while the other baselines receives from 1.24-3.73 on technical quality and 1.33-3.98 on semantic qual-ity. The cost per successful test case is approximately 40% lower than the WavefoRm baseline and for SMACK the cost is nearly identical, while querying the ASR model nearly 17 times as often, showing the efficiency per query. Our paper makes the following contributions: 

Approach We propose GATAS, a black-box testing approach for ASR systems that operates in the phoneme-level embedding space of a TTS model. By interpolating between ground-truth and noise embeddings at the per-phoneme level, the method generates natural-sounding audio while inducing controlled semantic changes in ASR transcriptions. 

Methodology We formulate test generation as a multi-objective optimization problem balancing semantic divergence and perturbation imperceptibility. This enables efficient discov-ery of test cases that alter ASR transcriptions while preserv-ing audio similarity and naturalness. 

Empirical Study We conduct an empirical evaluation on a stan-dard speech benchmark and a transformer-based ASR sys-tem, comparing against both black-box and white-box base-lines. The results show that GATAS achieves effectiveness comparable to the white-box baseline despite requiring only query access, while substantially outperforming the black-box baselines in audio quality and similarity to the original speech. Human evaluation confirms that the generated au-dio remains intelligible and natural-sounding. 

## 2 Background 2.1 Automatic Speech Recognition 

ASR systems map continuous audio signals ∈ 𝒳 to discrete token sequences ∈ 𝒯 , ASR ∶ 𝒳 → 𝒯 .This requires modeling both acoustic-phonetic structure and lin-guistic constraints [37]. The input waveform is typically transformed into a log-mel spectrogram, which serves as a time–frequency rep-resentation for neural processing. Classical ASR systems combined Gaussian mixture models with Hidden Markov Models to align acoustic features to phoneme states, together with n-gram language models for decoding. Modern systems instead use end-to-end neu-ral architectures [3]. End-to-end models either learn implicit align-ments [22] or generate token sequences autoregressively [14]. These approaches are commonly instantiated with transformer architec-tures [38, 51], whose self-attention mechanisms capture long-range dependencies and benefit from large-scale pre-training, significantly improving transcription accuracy. 

## 2.2 Text-to-speech 

TTS systems perform the inverse mapping, generating speech from textual input TTS ∶ 𝒯 → 𝒳 . Early pipelines separated text anal-ysis, acoustic modeling, and waveform synthesis, often producing intelligible but unnatural speech. Neural TTS replaces these com-ponents with learned models. Sequence-to-sequence architectures such as Tacotron [52] learn alignments between phonemes and acoustic frames, while neural vocoders such as HiFi-GAN [30] gen-erate high-fidelity waveforms. Recent models operate in learned latent spaces, where speech is represented by compact vectors en-coding content, speaker identity, and prosody [31]. These repre-sentations enable direct manipulation of acoustic properties at a fine-grained level, which is central to the attack mechanism stud-ied in this work. 

## 2.3 Testing Methods for ASR Systems 

The majority of literature on testing methods for ASR Systems comes from adversarial machine learning settings, where inputs are perturbed to induce incorrect model outputs. Prior work has shown that neural networks are sensitive to small, structured per-turbations, giving rise to adversarial examples [21, 49]. Such inputs are constructed through adversarial attacks, which are commonly categorized by the attacker’s knowledge of the system (e.g., white-box, gray-box, black-box) and the attack objective (targeted vs. un-targeted) [12, 21, 53]. Adversarial testing primarily targets the robustness of deep learn-ing, and thus automated speech recognition ASR systems, under worst-case perturbations. However, many real-world tasks require evaluating generalization, as training data cannot exhaustively cap-ture the variability of real-world conditions. This creates a gap: ex-isting testing methodologies emphasize robustness, while the sys-tematic assessment of generalization remains underexplored. Prior work in ASR testing reflects this limitation. Metamorphic testing approaches generate variants via affine transformations in waveform space, enabling robustness evaluation under controlled perturbations, but they do not produce functionally novel inputs; instead, they iteratively corrupt existing samples [27]. In contrast, work such as AequeVox highlights that generalization is critical for fairness, showing that natural variations in speech—e.g., due to native language or voice characteristics—can lead to significant performance degradation [40]. Testing generalization therefore requires the creation of func-tionally new inputs that extend beyond the training distribution while remaining realistic. This work addresses this gap by gener-ating novel test cases using TTS models. The generation process is guided by constraints that enforce realism and effectiveness, en-abling systematic exploration of previously unseen yet plausible inputs for evaluating ASR system behavior. 

## 2.4 Motivating Example 

To illustrate the challenges of testing ASR systems, consider this example. A user issues a simple voice command: “Turn on the light” .A standard ASR system correctly transcribes the utterance under nominal conditions. However, small variations in speech, such as changes in pronunciation, prosody, or acoustic realization, can lead to incorrect transcriptions such as “Turn on the night” or “Turn Generative Testing of Automated Speech Recognition Systems Conference’17, July 2017, Washington, DC, USA 

TTS Model 

(StyleTTS2) 

Interpolation 

GATAS-Manipulator 

SUT 

(Whisper) 

Objectives 

𝐹 •

Optimizer 

(NSGA-II) 

initial text 𝑡 

initial random 𝜅 

h′

> text

𝑥 ̂𝑡 

ℝ

new 𝜅 

Figure 1: Overview of GATAS. The initial input text 𝑡 is processed by theManipulator, where interpolation between h GT  

> text

and hnoise parameterized by 𝜅 produces h ′

> text

, which is synthesized by the TTS model into audio 𝑥 . The SUT then produces transcrip-tion ̂ 𝑡 , which is evaluated by the objectives and used by the optimizer to update 𝜅 .

on the line” . These variations may arise naturally (e.g., due to ac-cent or speaking style) or be induced artificially. Importantly, such changes do not require large or unrealistic perturbations, but can result from subtle modifications in the acoustic signal that remain perceptually plausible. Existing testing approaches primarily gen-erate variants by perturbing existing recordings, limiting cover-age to transformations of known inputs. In contrast, our approach leverages TTS models to generate new speech samples that system-atically explore variations in phonetic realization while preserving naturalness. This enables the construction of new functional test cases that remain realistic yet expose previously unseen failures. 

## 3 Methodology 

This work proposes GATAS, a novel black-box test case generator for ASR systems. The pipeline is illustrated in Fig. 1 and comprises four components: (i) the System under Test (SUT) , namely the target ASR system, (ii) a Manipulator , which perturbs the phoneme-level acoustic latent space of a TTS model to generate candidate audio samples, (iii) an Optimizer to find optimal solutions, and (iv) Objec-tives that evaluate semantic transcription divergence and pertur-bation imperceptibility. A key design choice of our approach is to operate in the la-tent space of a TTS model rather than directly in the waveform domain. This choice fundamentally affects the structure of the op-timization problem. Indeed, in waveform space, inputs are high-dimensional and lack semantic structure: small perturbations do not correspond to meaningful changes in phonetic content, and optimization tends to introduce noise-like artifacts. As a result, se-mantic divergence and perceptual quality become conflicting ob-jectives, where increasing one degrades the other. In contrast, the TTS latent space is organized around acous-tic meaning. Interpolations correspond to controlled variations in phoneme realization, and the generative decoder constrains out-puts to remain on the manifold of natural speech. This induces a well-structured search space in which semantic divergence and perceptual quality become compatible objectives, enabling effec-tive and realistic test generation. Algorithm 1 details the test generation process. First, the ground-truth acoustic embedding hGT text is extracted from the TTS encoder (line 1), a noise embedding hnoise is sampled as a directional refer-ence (line 2), and a population of candidate solutions is initialized 

Algorithm 1 GATAS 

Require: Ground truth text GT, black-box ASR system 

Ensure: Generated audio  

> 1:

Extract hGT text from TTS given GT  

> 2:

Sample hnoise ∼ 𝒩 (𝜇 GT , 𝜎 GT ) 

> 3:

Initialize population 𝑃 , archive 𝐴 ← ∅  

> 4:

for generation 𝑔 = 1 to max_generations do  

> 5:

for each individual 𝜅 in 𝑃 do  

> 6:

h′ 

> text

← (1 − 𝜅) ⊙ hGT text + 𝜅 ⊙ hnoise  

> 7:

audio ← TTS (h′

> text

, other features from GT ) 

> 8:

transcription ← SUT (audio ) 

> 9:

𝐹 1 ← SetOverlap (transcription , GT ) 

> 10:

𝐹 2 ← PESQ (audio , audio GT ) 

> 11:

fitness [𝜅] ← (𝐹 1, 𝐹 2) 

> 12:

end for  

> 13:

𝐴 ← non_dominated (𝐴 ∪ 𝑃)  

> 14:

if any 𝜅 in 𝐴 early stopping criteria then  

> 15:

break  

> 16:

end if  

> 17:

𝑃 ← Optimizer (𝑃 ∪ 𝐴, fitness ) 

> 18:

end for  

> 19:

𝜅 best ← threshold_proportional_l3_selection (𝐴)  

> 20:

h′ 

> text

← (1 − 𝜅 best ) ⊙ hGT text + 𝜅 best ⊙ hnoise  

> 21:

return TTS (htext , other features from GT )

(line 3). Second, in the optimization loop, each candidate, repre-senting interpolation weights for the embeddings, results in a per-turbed embedding h′ 

> text

which is synthesized by the TTS model into audio and evaluated by the ASR system (lines 5–12). The re-sulting transcription and perceptual quality are used to guide the search (line 17). Third, from all non-dominated solutions encoun-tered during optimization, the best candidate is selected for the final solution (lines 20-21). In the remaining of the section, we provide additional details on each component of GATAS. 

## 3.1 System under Test 

The system under test is an ASR system that maps an input au-dio signal 𝑥 to a transcription 𝑡 = 𝑓 (𝑥) . In this work we consider a strict black-box setting in which no access to system internals Conference’17, July 2017, Washington, DC, USA Trovato et al.  

> Text “Testing is so much fun!”
> Phonemes
> Acoustic Text Encoder
> Prosodic Text Encoder
> htext hbert
> Internals & Decoder
> Audio

Figure 2: Simplified StyleTTS2 pipeline [31]. 

is available, including architecture, parameters, gradients, or inter-mediate outputs. In short, the only observable output is the final transcription produced by the system. We focus on untargeted test generation, where any semantically meaningful deviation from the original transcription constitutes success, because this formulation reflects realistic scenarios, where specifying a target transcription is impractical due to the open vo-cabulary and variable-length outputs of ASR systems. Our approach operates in a digital setting, where generated au-dio is directly provided to the ASR system. A test case is considered failure inducing when it induces a semantic change in the tran-scription while preserving perceptual plausibility of the audio. 

## 3.2 Manipulator 

The manipulation operates in the phoneme-level acoustic embed-ding space of a TTS model. Specifically, GATAS uses the acoustic text embeddings htext ∈ ℝ 𝑝×512 produced by the StyleTTS2 acous-tic encoder [31], as shown in Fig. 2. This representation encodes the phonetic content of the synthesized speech, while other compo-nents (e.g., prosody and style) govern timing, expressiveness, and speaker characteristics. By modifying htext , GATAS alters the pho-netic content while preserving these attributes. Importantly, oper-ating in this latent space constrains generated audio to remain on the natural speech manifold, as enforced by the TTS decoder. We choose to manipulate htext as alternative intervention points are less suitable. Style variables primarily encode speaker iden-tity and exhibit limited variability in our setting (Fig. 2 Internals). Prosodic representations mainly control timing and rhythm, and perturbing them degrades naturalness without reliably affecting phonetic content (found in Fig. 2 under hbert ). Downstream rep-resentations are already temporally expanded or entangled with style information, making controlled manipulation more difficult. In contrast, htext provides a compact and semantically aligned rep-resentation for phoneme-level control. Let hGT text denote the embedding extracted from the ground-truth input. Direct optimization over htext ∈ ℝ 𝑝×512 is intractable due to its dimensionality ( 512𝑝 degrees of freedom). We therefore pa-rameterize the manipulation using a per-phoneme interpolation vector 

𝜅 ∈ [0, 1] 𝑝 , (1) where each 𝜅 𝑖 controls the degree of perturbation applied to the 

𝑖 -th phoneme. To define a reference direction in latent space, we sample a noise embedding matched to the statistics of the ground-truth representation: 

hnoise ∼ 𝒩 (𝜇 GT , 𝜎 GT ), (2) where 𝜇 GT and 𝜎 GT are computed element-wise from hGT text . The perturbed embedding is then computed as 

h′ 

> text

= (1 − 𝜅) ⊙ hGT text + 𝜅 ⊙ hnoise , (3) where 𝜅 is broadcast using the Hadamard product ⊙ across the 512-dimensional phoneme embeddings. This reduces the search space from 512𝑝 to 𝑝 dimensions while enabling fine-grained control over individual phonemes. Finally, the modified embedding h′ 

> text

is passed through the TTS model to synthesize the new audio for the proposed test case. 

## 3.3 Optimizer 

We formulate test generation as a multi-objective optimization prob-lem [18], using a gradient-free evolutionary algorithm that main-tains a diverse set of Pareto-optimal solutions. The objective is to optimize a set of objectives capturing semantic and perceptual properties of the generated audio. The population is initialized by sampling individuals uniformly from [0, 1] 𝑝 , augmented with a seeded individual ∑ 𝜅 = 1 to en-sure coverage of high-divergence regions of the search space. At each generation, individuals are evaluated with respect to the objective set and ranked via non-dominated sorting, with selection performed using crowding distance to preserve diversity. To retain high-quality solutions across generations, we maintain an archive of non-dominated individuals: 

𝐴 ← non_dominated (𝐴 ∪ 𝑃). (4) The optimization proceeds until either the query budget is ex-hausted or an early stopping criterion is met. The early stopping condition is defined in terms of the objectives and is detailed in the next section. The final solution is selected from the archive based on a balanced trade-off across the objective set. 

## 3.4 Objectives 

The objectives of GATAS test generation aim to balance seman-tic divergence of the ASR output and perceptual similarity of the generated audio. In particular, two objectives are used. 

Semantic Divergence (SetOverlap). The first objective measures semantic preservation using a set-based overlap between content words in the ground truth transcription and the ASR output. To en-sure that only semantically meaningful differences are considered, both texts undergo identical pre-processing. First, function words (e.g., “the”, “is”, “on”) are removed using a standard English stop-word list 𝒮 [10], as these contribute little Generative Testing of Automated Speech Recognition Systems Conference’17, July 2017, Washington, DC, USA 

semantic content and are typically robust to perturbations. Second, remaining words are normalized via WordNet lemmatization [34], mapping each word 𝑤 to its canonical base form 𝜆(𝑤) . This col-lapses morphological variants (e.g., “sliding” → “slide”, “bananas” 

→ “banana”) into a single representation. The resulting content-word set is defined as: 

𝑊 ( text ) = { 𝜆(𝑤) ∣ 𝑤 ∈ words (text ), 𝑤 ∉ 𝒮 } (5) Then, SetOverlap is computed as: 

𝐹 1 = |𝑊 ( GT ) ∩ 𝑊 ( ASR )| |𝑊 ( GT )| (6) This metric measures the fraction of original semantic content preserved in the ASR transcription. A value of 0.0 indicates com-plete semantic divergence, while 1.0 indicates perfect preservation. 

Perceptual Similarity (PESQ). Perceptual similarity between the test case and ground-truth audio is measured using PESQ [43]. PESQ produces a raw score in the range [−0.5, 4.5] , which corre-lates with human perceptual judgments and can be mapped to the MOS-LQO scale [26]. To use PESQ as a minimization objective, we normalize and invert the score: PESQ norm = PESQ raw + 0.5 5.0 , 𝐹 2 = 1 − PESQ norm (7) Lower values of 𝐹 2 correspond to higher perceptual quality, i.e., closer similarity to the original audio. 

## 4 Empirical Study 4.1 Research Questions 

We investigate three research questions: 

RQ 1 (effectiveness): How effective is GATAS in generating au-dio test cases that induces semantic divergence in ASR transcriptions while preserving perturbation imperceptibility? 

RQ 2 (validity): Are the generated test cases by GATAS perceived by humans as natural and intelligible? 

RQ 3 (efficiency): How efficient is GATAS in generating failure inducing test inputs? 

RQ 1 evaluates the ability of our approach to achieve meaning-ful transcription changes and high audio similarity. In addition to overall success, we analyze semantic divergence and audio quality separately to assess whether the generated test cases induce con-trolled and non-trivial changes rather than noisy outputs. RQ 2 assesses whether the generated test cases remain percep-tually valid by evaluating human judgments of audio quality and intelligibility. This determines whether the generated test cases are realistic speech signals rather than degenerate artifacts. RQ 3 measures efficiency in terms of ASR query usage, conver-gence speed, and runtime, and compare these aspects against our baseline methods to determine whether the approach remains com-putationally practical. 

## 4.2 Metrics 

4.2.1 RQ 1. To evaluate generated test cases, we consider multiple complementary dimensions capturing behavioral impact, percep-tual realism, and perturbation magnitude. These dimensions are necessary, as changes in transcription alone do not indicate mean-ingful failures, and perceptual plausibility is required to ensure re-alistic test inputs, using the following metrics. 

Success. (↑): Measures the fraction of generated test cases that change the ASR transcription, indicating altered system behavior. As transcription changes are not inherently erroneous, this metric is evaluated alongside measures that quantify the magnitude and nature of these changes. 

UTMOS. (↑): A neural approximation of the mean opinion score for audio naturalness [45]. This metric assesses whether generated test cases remain perceptually plausible, as unrealistic or nonsen-sical audio would invalidate expected ASR behavior. 

Spectrogram-𝑑 𝐹 . (↓): Quantifies perturbation magnitude using the Frobenius distance between MEL-spectrograms, capturing changes in time–frequency representations. Lower values indicate less de-structive and more subtle modifications. 

Raw-𝑑 𝐶 . (↓): Measures character-level differences in ASR outputs, capturing fine-grained changes such as insertions, deletions, or substitutions that may not significantly affect semantic meaning. 

Embedding-𝑑 𝐶 . (↓): Assesses semantic change by computing dis-tances between sentence embeddings of ASR outputs using the all-MiniLM-L6-v2 model from the sentence-transformers library. This captures higher-level content shifts while remaining reproducible and computationally efficient. 

4.2.2 RQ 2. To assess the perceptual quality of generated test cases, we conduct a human evaluation focusing on both audio fidelity and semantic intelligibility. We report Mean Opinion Score (MOS) rat-ings along two complementary dimensions. 

Technical MOS. (↑): Assesses perceptual audio quality in terms of clarity, distortion, and noise. Ratings are collected using the MOS scale [25], ranging from 1 (heavily corrupted) to 5 (perfectly clear). Participants respond to the question: How would you rate the tech-nical audio quality (e.g., noise, distortion, clarity)? 

Semantic MOS. (↑): Evaluates the perceived intelligibility and co-herence of the spoken content. Using the same MOS scale (1–5), ratings range from 1 (nonsensical or unintelligible) to 5 (fully co-herent and meaningful). Participants respond to the question: How would you rate the semantic quality of the spoken content? 

4.2.3 RQ 3. To evaluate the efficiency of test generation, we mea-sure both computational cost and interaction requirements with the system under test, using the following metrics. 

Runtime per attack. (↓): Measures the time required to generate a single test case, reported in seconds. Although runtime depends on implementation details and hardware, this metric provides a comparable estimate of computational cost across methods. 

Query budget. (↓): Captures the number of interactions with the system under test (SUT) during test case generation. This metric must be interpreted with caution: white-box methods require fewer queries due to access to internal parameters, and different black-box methods rely on fundamentally different optimization strate-gies, preventing direct alignment across methods. 

## 4.3 Objects of Study 

4.3.1 Dataset. We use the Harvard Sentences corpus [44], which consists of 720 phonetically balanced English sentences originally Conference’17, July 2017, Washington, DC, USA Trovato et al. 

designed for speech intelligibility evaluation. 1 We select the first 100 sentences to evaluate the proposed TTS-based attack and the baselines. The dataset is well suited to our setting: its phonetic bal-ance ensures coverage of diverse acoustic conditions, while low semantic predictability reduces reliance on language-model priors, forcing ASR decisions to be driven primarily by acoustic input. 

4.3.2 System under Test. We adopt Whisper tiny ( openai/whisper-tiny ) [38], an end-to-end encoder-decoder transformer trained on 680,000 hours of diverse, multilingual, and noisy audio data. The ASR system is treated strictly as a black box: only final transcrip-tions are observed, with no access to gradients, probabilities, or activations. Decoding temperature is set to 0, enforcing greedy decoding and deterministic outputs. This ensures identical audio inputs produce identical transcriptions, which is necessary for stable fitness eval-uation. Whisper tiny is also chosen for computational efficiency, enabling more candidate evaluations within a fixed time budget— important for population-based optimization, where query count affects convergence. 

4.3.3 Baselines. The WavefoRm baseline uses the same evolution-ary computation as GATAS but operates directly in waveform space. Instead of manipulating latent representations, interpolation is ap-plied between the TTS-generated ground-truth waveform and Gauss-ian noise. All other components, including objective functions, suc-cess criteria, and early stopping, remain identical. This isolates the effect of representation space, so performance differences are at-tributable to the search space rather than algorithmic factors. We further compare against SMACK [57], a black-box attack combining genetic search with gradient estimation over prosodic features. As SMACK was originally designed for targeted attacks, we adapt it to the untargeted setting by replacing its loss function accordingly. Original optimization parameters are retained, as the methods use fundamentally different frameworks. Finally, we include PGD [36], a white-box baseline to assess per-formance relative to methods with access to model internals. As its optimization is not directly compatible with our setting, we use the parameters specified in the original work. 

## 4.4 Experimental Setup 

For RQ 1, we executed GATAS and the baselines with a popula-tion size selected via preliminary experiments over {50, 100, 200} .Smaller population sizes led to premature convergence, while 100 provided stable and quick exploration and was therefore adopted. The number of generations is fixed to 100, yielding a maximum query budget of 10,000 evaluations per run. Early stopping is ap-plied once both success thresholds are satisfied. The mutation probability is defined per variable as 1/𝑛 var , adapt-ing automatically to the dimensionality of the interpolation vector. For early stopping, a run is considered successful when both objec-tives satisfy: SetOverlap ≤ 0.5 ∧ PESQ norm ≤ 0.2 (8) 

> 1https://www.cs.columbia.edu/~hgs/audio/harvard.html

Table 1: Effectiveness results (RQ 1) for all approaches.                                                                 

> Success ↑UTMOS ↑𝑑 𝐹 -Spec ↓𝑑 𝐶 -Raw ↓𝑑 𝐶 -Emb ↓
> GATAS 0.980 4.466 ±0.030 0.017 ±0.002 0.047 ±0.066 0.439 ±0.190
> WavefoRm 0.990 2.108 ±0.108 0.106 ±0.023 0.695 ±0.269 0.908 ±0.114 SMACK 1.000 2.101 ±0.067 0.270 ±0.024 0.191 ±0.177 0.806 ±0.224 PGD 1.000 4.443 ±0.041 0.045 ±0.006 0.157 ±0.103 0.870 ±0.130

Table 2: Statistical comparison of baselines versus GATAS. Wilcoxon signed-rank test p-values and Cohen’s d effect sizes; bold indicates statistical significance.                               

> UTMOS 𝑑 𝐹 -Spec 𝑑 𝐶 -Raw 𝑑 𝐶 -Embmb WavefoRm 1.94e-18 20.4 1.95e-18 3.8 2.13e-18 2.4 1.88e-17 2.1 SMACK 1.95e-18 31 1.95e-18 10.4 1.79e-16 0.8 3.06e-15 1.3 PGD 4.44e-03 0.3 1.95e-18 5.1 1.84e-16 0.9 2.05e-17 1.7

The SetOverlap threshold enforces that at least half of the se-mantically meaningful content words are changed, preventing triv-ial variations. The normalized PESQ threshold corresponds to a raw PESQ score of approximately ≥ 3.5 (MOS-LQO ≥ 3.55 ), indi-cating perceptual quality between fair and good [24]. These thresh-olds balance semantic divergence and perceptual similarity and are aligned with prior work in testing audio consuming deep learning systems [24]. To answer RQ 2, we conduct a human study to assess percep-tual audio quality along two dimensions: technical quality and se-mantic quality. The evaluation covers five conditions: unperturbed ground truth audio synthesized by StyleTTS2, GATAS, WavefoRm, SMACK, and PGD. For each condition, 10 sentences are included, yielding 50 audio clips in total. A total of 10 participants, recruited from an academic environ-ment and indipedent from this work, each evaluated all 50 clips. For every audio clip, participants rated both technical and seman-tic quality on a 1 to 5 MOS scale, as defined in Section 4.2. In total, this yields 50 × 10 = 500 individual ratings per dimension. 

## 4.5 Results 

4.5.1 Effectiveness (RQ 1). Table 1 summarizes the performance of all methods across attack success, audio quality, and distortion-based metrics. Overall, GATAS achieves a success rate of 0.980 ,comparable to the baselines (all ≥ 0.990 ), indicating that it main-tains competitive effectiveness while optimizing other objectives. In particular, looking at audio quality, GATAS achieves the high-est UTMOS score ( 4.466 ), slightly outperforming PGD ( 4.443 ) and substantially exceeding WavefoRm and SMACK (both around 2.1 ). This indicates that, even when failure exposure is comparable, GATAS preserves naturalness significantly better than most baselines. Across all distortion metrics, GATAS consistently yields the low-est values. Specifically, it achieves a 𝑑 𝐹 -Spec of 0.017 , compared to at least 0.045 for competing methods. Similarly, for 𝑑 𝐶 -Raw and 

𝑑 𝐶 -Emb, GATAS obtains 0.047 and 0.439 , respectively, both sub-stantially lower than all baselines. These results demonstrate that GATAS introduces minimal perturbations in both signal space and embedding space. The statistical analysis in Table 2 confirms that these improve-ments are significant. We compute 𝑝 -values using the Wilcoxon Generative Testing of Automated Speech Recognition Systems Conference’17, July 2017, Washington, DC, USA    

> (a) GATAS (b) WavefoRm (c) SMACK (d) PGD

Figure 3: Spectrogram comparison of the original audio versus the generated test case for each approach. 

signed-rank test [55], and consider results to be statistically signif-icant when 𝑝 < 10 −2 . For effect sizes we use Cohen’s 𝑑 , where val-ues above 0.5 indicate medium effect size and values above 0.8 indi-cate large effect size. Under this criterion, all comparisons against WavefoRm and SMACK are highly significant ( 𝑝 < 10 −15 ) with large effect sizes across all metrics, indicating substantial practical improvements. When compared to PGD, the differences remain statistically significant across all metrics (e.g., 𝑝 = 4.44 × 10 −3 for UTMOS), although effect sizes are smaller (e.g., 𝑑 = 0.3 for UT-MOS), reflecting closer performance between the two methods. 

Qualitative Analysis of Failures. Fig. 3 provides qualitative exam-ples. For each approach, the ground truth audio is shown on top, the generated test case in the middle, and the spectrogram differ-ence at the bottom, for which blue regions is a negative change in dB in the final spectrogram, whereas red regions indicate a positive change in dB in the final testcase. The visual differences align with the quantitative findings. GATAS exhibits consistently low-intensity difference patterns, indicating minimal perturbations, while the generated audio remains visually close to the original despite inducing transcription changes. In con-trast, WavefoRm produces visibly stronger and more widespread modifications, and SMACK introduces substantial structural changes, including altered signal length and broadly increased amplitudes. PGD shows more localized but still noticeable modifications, often amplifying previously inactive frequency regions. These observa-tions further support that GATAS achieves lower distortion while maintaining effectiveness. Beyond aggregate metrics, we analyze the nature of failures in-duced by GATAS to better understand how perturbations affect ASR behavior. We observe that generated test cases do not produce uniform errors, but instead induce a range of qualitatively distinct failure modes. First, we observe phonetic substitutions , where specific words are replaced by acoustically similar alternatives (e.g., “light” →

“night”). These errors often preserve the overall sentence structure while altering the meaning, indicating that small changes in pho-netic realization can shift decoding decisions. One example is the 

Figure 4: Example change in frequency band amplitudes. 

sentence “This is a grand season for hikes on the road.” which is tran-scribed by the ASR system as “This is a grand Caesar for Heiks on the road.” Although the transcription differs, the audio itself has not changed significantly from a human perception standpoint. This is illustrated in Fig. 4, which shows the difference in dB across fre-quency bands is quite isolated to one region in the middle explain-ing the change from hikes to Heiks , while season to Cesar required less change as they are pronounced quite similarly. Second, we identify semantic drift , where multiple words are modified, resulting in a transcription that remains syntactically valid but semantically different from the original utterance. In these cases, errors accumulate across the sequence, suggesting that lo-cal perturbations can propagate through the model’s decoding pro-cess. As an example the sentence “The boy was there when the sun rose“ changed to “The people who was there were the sunrobes“ .Third, we observe partial degradation , where only segments of the utterance are affected, leading to insertions, deletions, or local-ized substitutions, such as the case where “A pound of sugar costs more than eggs“ degrades to “A town of Shubber costs more than eggs“ .A key distinction emerges when comparing these failures to waveform-based approaches. While both methods achieve high at-tack success, waveform perturbations often lead to near-complete transcription breakdown, as reflected by extremely high character error rates. In contrast, GATAS maintains substantially lower error Conference’17, July 2017, Washington, DC, USA Trovato et al. 

Table 3: Mean Opinion Scores on audio quality (RQ 2). 

MOS Technical MOS Semantic 

Ground Truth 4.92 ± 0.31 4.01 ± 1.24 

GATAS 4.81 ± 0.54 3.86 ± 1.26 

WavefoRm 1.24 ± 0.53 1.33 ± 0.79 

SMACK 1.31 ± 0.54 1.57 ± 0.78 

PGD 3.73 ± 1.23 3.98 ± 1.30 

rates, indicating that the generated audio remains largely intelligi-ble despite inducing incorrect outputs. This suggests that GATAS produces controlled deviations from the original transcription rather than global corruption. Instead of collapsing into noise, the system generates plausible alternative transcriptions that preserve structure while altering content. These differences stem from the structure of the search space: waveform-based methods frequently push inputs outside the natural speech manifold, whereas latent-space manipulation remains within it, en-abling structured and linguistically plausible variations. From a testing perspective, this is critical: GATAS exposes di-verse and realistic failure behaviors, while baseline approaches pre-dominantly reveal sensitivity to signal degradation. 

RQ 1 (effectiveness): GATAS maintains competitive attack suc-cess while achieving the highest audio quality and lowest dis-tortion across all evaluated metrics. It therefore provides the most favorable trade-off between effectiveness and impercepti-bility among the compared methods. These results suggest that effectiveness is largely determined by the structure of the search space rather than the optimization algorithm. Latent-space ma-nipulation achieves better trade-offs than waveform-based ap-proaches, highlighting the importance of semantically aligned representations. 

4.5.2 Validity (RQ 2). Table 3 reports MOS reported by human as-sessors for both technical and semantic audio quality. The ground truth establishes an upper bound for technical quality ( 4.92 ) and a reference level for semantic consistency ( 4.01 ). GATAS achieves the highest technical MOS among all methods (4.81 ), closely approaching ground truth quality, indicating that perturbations have minimal impact on perceptual audio fidelity. In contrast, WavefoRm and SMACK show substantially degraded technical quality (both ≈ 1.3 ), reflecting strong perceptual distor-tions. PGD performs moderately ( 3.73 ), but remains noticeably be-low GATAS. For semantic MOS, PGD attains the highest score ( 3.98 ), closely matching the ground truth, while GATAS ranks second ( 3.86 ), in-dicating that semantic content is largely preserved. In contrast, WavefoRm and SMACK again perform poorly (both ≤ 1.57 ), sug-gesting significant degradation of perceived content. 

Table 4: Efficiency results (RQ 3). 

Runtime (sec) ↓ Budget ↓

GATAS 222.43 ± 168.00 5067.33 ± 3752.31 SMACK 223.73 ± 48.80 300.00 ± 0.00 Waveform 361.69 ± 285.16 7039.00 ± 4151.12 PGD 15.86 ± 1.27 200.00. ± 0.00 RQ 2 (validity): GATAS achieves the highest technical audio quality while maintaining competitive semantic fidelity, second only to PGD. In contrast, WavefoRm and SMACK substantially degrade both technical and semantic quality. Overall, GATAS provides the most balanced preservation of perceptual audio characteristics among the evaluated methods. 

4.5.3 Efficiency (RQ 3). Table 4 summarizes runtime and query bud-get across all methods. Since all approaches query the same system under test, the cost per query is identical across methods. Conse-quently, differences in runtime are attributable to algorithmic char-acteristics, such as optimization strategy and associated overhead. As shown in Table 4, PGD achieves the lowest runtime ( 15.86 

seconds) and the smallest query budget (200), reflecting its gradient-based optimization and direct access to model internals. Similarly, SMACK operates with a fixed and low query budget (300) and a runtime comparable to GATAS ( 223.73 seconds vs. 222.43 seconds), indicating efficient execution under its specific optimization de-sign. In contrast, GATAS and WavefoRm exhibit substantially higher mean query budgets, with 5067.33 and 7039.00 , respectively, as reported in Table 4. Despite this, GATAS achieves a lower aver-age runtime ( 222.43 seconds) than WavefoRm ( 361.69 seconds), indicating more efficient optimization dynamics given compara-ble query costs. The higher variance observed for both methods reflects the adaptive nature of the search process. For GATAS and WavefoRm, early stopping criteria are applied as described in Section 4.4, reducing unnecessary computation once suitable solutions are found. In contrast, early stopping is not ap-plied to SMACK and PGD, as their optimization procedures differ and do not support comparable stopping conditions. To assess convergence behavior and the impact of early stop-ping for WavefoRm and GATAS, we plot the cumulative success rate across test cases in Fig. 5. The results show that GATAS ex-hibits a steeper increase, indicating that the early stopping criteria are met more frequently and earlier during optimization. In con-trast, WavefoRm shows a plateau after approximately 20 genera-tions, suggesting difficulty in satisfying the defined thresholds. Towards the end of the optimization process, both methods ex-hibit an increase in success rate. This is explained by the definition of success as any change in ASR transcription: even if qualitative thresholds are not met, termination of the optimization can still yield a successful outcome under this criterion. Generative Testing of Automated Speech Recognition Systems Conference’17, July 2017, Washington, DC, USA 20 40 60 80 100 

> Generation
> 0.0
> 0.2
> 0.4
> 0.6
> 0.8
> 1.0
> Cumulative Success Rate  GATAS Waveform

Figure 5: Cumulative success rate (RQ 3). RQ 3 (efficiency): GATAS achieves competitive runtime while operating under substantially higher query budgets than fixed-budget baselines, indicating more efficient optimization dynam-ics compared to WavefoRm. While gradient-based methods (PGD) and constrained approaches (SMACK) are faster due to lower query requirements, GATAS benefits from early stopping and converges more reliably, reaching successful solutions ear-lier in the optimization process. 

## 4.6 Threats to Validity 

4.6.1 Internal Validity. All methods are evaluated under identical optimization settings where applicable, including the same hyper-parameters and configurations, such as fitness functions, success thresholds, and query budgets, ensuring a fair comparison between the proposed method and the waveform baseline. Early stopping is applied consistently across all runs. However, exact parameter alignment is not always meaningful due to fundamental differences in method design and optimization requirements. In such cases, de-viations are explicitly documented and justified to mitigate threats to internal validity. The ASR system is treated as deterministic by enforcing greedy decoding; however, minor non-determinism may still arise from GPU execution (e.g., cuBLAS), potentially affecting reproducibil-ity of individual runs. In the human study, variability in partici-pant responses is inherent; this is addressed through randomized assignment, balanced condition exposure, and data cleaning to re-move inconsistent or invalid responses. 

4.6.2 External Validity. The evaluation is conducted on a single ASR system (Whisper tiny) and a single-speaker TTS model, which may limit generalizability to other architectures, larger ASR mod-els, or multi-speaker and more diverse speech settings. The dataset consists of phonetically balanced but relatively short and semanti-cally simple sentences, which may not fully represent real-world speech. Generalization to other languages, domains, and ASR sys-tems is left for future work. 

4.6.3 Replicability. To facilitate replication and enable public scrutiny of our results, we provide a replication package [41] that includes the GATAS implementation, experimental scripts, and datasets. 

## 5 Discussion 

The performance gap between methods is structural, not al-gorithmic. GATAS and WavefoRm use identical optimization se-tups, yet GATAS achieves a 98% success rate while significantly outperforming all baselines in quality and distortion metrics (Ta-ble 1). This gap stems from the interpolation domain: in the TTS embedding space, each phoneme is controlled independently via a 512-dimensional vector, allowing semantic divergence and audio quality to improve simultaneously, as the TTS decoder constrains outputs to remain natural. In waveform space, semantic change re-quires signal degradation, making the two objectives antagonistic. Human evaluation confirms this structural advantage. As shown in Table 3, GATAS achieves the highest technical quality and the second-highest semantic quality, closely approaching ground truth audio. SMACK, despite operating on prosodic feature representa-tions rather than raw waveforms, was designed for targeted at-tacks against pre-transformer ASR systems; adapting it to an un-targeted setting on Whisper produces results comparable to the WavefoRm baseline. PGD achieves comparable effectiveness and semantic fidelity to GATAS, as expected given full gradient access, but requires white-box access unavailable in deployed systems and GATAS provides substantially better audio quality and lower dis-tortion even compared to this white-box method. In terms of efficiency, PGD achieves the lowest runtime due to gradient-based optimization, but GATAS attains the second-lowest runtime despite a substantially larger query budget. This suggests that the well-conditioned embedding space allows GATAS to con-vert search effort into successful solutions more effectively than other black-box approaches. 

Untargeted formulation is better suited to the speech do-main. Many black-box ASR attacks rely on predefined target tran-scriptions [4, 19, 50, 57], requiring the optimization to align gen-erated audio with a specific output. In the speech domain, vari-ability in phoneme duration and temporal structure makes con-vergence toward arbitrary target phrases difficult, often requiring larger perturbations that degrade naturalness. GATAS sidesteps this by adopting an untargeted formulation that seeks any seman-tically divergent transcription rather than a specific one, relaxing alignment requirements while still enforcing quality constraints through the multi-objective optimization. This distinction also explains SMACK’s weak performance in our evaluation. Originally designed for targeted optimization, its search strategy is tightly coupled to the presence of explicit targets; removing them degrades both effectiveness and audio quality. 

## 6 Related Work 

Machine learning systems are increasingly evaluated through test-ing methods that probe model behavior under distribution shifts and structured input modifications. In the audio domain, such test-ing is constrained by human perception, requiring that modified inputs remain natural and intelligible. This section reviews prior work on generative testing approaches and ASR-specific methods under different access models, highlighting the absence of naturalness-preserving black-box testing strategies. Conference’17, July 2017, Washington, DC, USA Trovato et al. 

## 6.1 Generative Testing Approaches 

Generative models provide a mechanism for testing model behav-ior by producing inputs directly from the data distribution. Rather than relying on input-level perturbations, these methods operate in latent spaces, where learned representations constrain outputs to remain realistic while enabling structured exploration. Early work primarily relied on GANs. Zhao et al. [60] showed that manipulating GAN latent representations yields realistic in-puts that can expose model failures, while Song et al. [48] intro-duced constraints to balance realism and misclassification. Subse-quent approaches demonstrated that structured latent spaces en-able controlled exploration of the data manifold while preserving perceptual validity [15, 33, 53]. Latent-space manipulation has since been explored across dif-ferent generative model classes. Noise-based methods perturb la-tent representations in VAEs [28], GANs [11], and diffusion mod-els [32]. While these approaches enable broad exploration, they typically lack precise control over the resulting samples. Diffusion models have recently gained prominence due to their higher fi-delity and stability [8, 32, 35, 54], and have been used for tasks such as semantically guided input synthesis via inpainting [35]. However, even in diffusion-based approaches, manipulation is of-ten indirect and constrained by the underlying generative process. In audio, generative testing remains comparatively underexplored, especially in the audio domain. Xie et al. [56] propose a model that generates perturbations in a single forward pass, improving effi-ciency but still operating at the signal level and targeting classifi-cation tasks. Cheng et al. [17] manipulate linguistic embeddings within a TTS model, but explicitly maximize distortion, resulting in outputs that are not intelligible to humans. Overall, prior work shows that latent-space manipulation can preserve naturalness by construction while enabling systematic test generation. However, existing approaches either rely on weakly controlled perturbations or do not enforce perceptual quality. This gap is particularly evident for ASR testing in black-box settings. 

## 6.2 White-box Testing of ASR Systems 

White-box testing methods assume access to model internals such as gradients and alignments. Carlini and Wagner [13] demonstrated that ASR systems can be systematically probed by optimizing in-puts to produce specific transcriptions, exploiting sequence align-ment mechanisms. Schönherr et al. [46] incorporated psychoacous-tic masking to ensure that modifications remain inaudible by con-straining them to masked frequency regions. These approaches enable precise and effective testing of ASR behavior, but rely on full model access and are therefore not appli-cable to deployed systems accessed via APIs. 

## 6.3 Black-box Testing of ASR Systems 

Black-box testing methods operate without access to gradients and instead rely on model queries or transferability. A large body of work explores search-based strategies in waveform space. Alzan-tot et al. [4] used genetic algorithms to evolve audio inputs that alter ASR outputs, demonstrating feasibility in a black-box setting. Taori et al. [50] extended this to full sentences using hybrid opti-mization, while Du et al. [19] applied particle swarm optimization. These approaches consistently operate directly on the waveform, leading to perceptible artifacts. Subsequent work improves efficiency and search strategies. Oc-cam [61] reduces dimensionality via segmentation, though it as-sumes limited cross-segment dependencies. Kenansville [1] removes frequency components without iterative optimization, trading ef-fectiveness for audio degradation. NP-Attack [9] models the de-cision boundary explicitly to guide search under hard-label con-straints, but remains waveform-based. Other works use a differen-tial testing approach to uncover failures in ASR systems, however focusing on manipulations only in the text sequence space [6, 7]. Transfer-based approaches optimize inputs against surrogate models. Devil’s Whisper [16] constructs substitute models using TTS-generated data and improves transfer through ensembling, while Fang et al. [20] optimize across multiple models without querying the target system. These methods depend on transferabil-ity assumptions and do not explicitly control perceptual quality. Specialized approaches exploit domain-specific properties. Ul-trasonic methods such as DolphinAttack [59] and UltraAdv [58] operate outside the human hearing range but require specific hard-ware conditions. Other methods target model-specific behaviors, such as Whisper muting attacks [39]. These approaches are effec-tive in constrained scenarios but lack general applicability. Across black-box methods, a consistent limitation emerges: op-erating in waveform space makes it difficult to simultaneously ex-plore model behavior and preserve perceptual naturalness, which is one of the design goals behind GATAS. 

## 7 Conclusions and Future Work 

This work introduced GATAS, a black-box method for generating test cases for ASR systems by operating in the phoneme-level em-bedding space of a TTS model. The results show that this repre-sentation enables simultaneous control over transcription changes and audio quality, producing test cases that remain natural while reliably inducing misrecognition. Compared to waveform-based methods, phoneme-level latent manipulation yields lower distor-tion and higher audio quality at comparable success rates. In addi-tion, GATAS achieves performance close to a white-box baseline without requiring access to model internals, indicating that repre-sentation choice and objective design are more critical than gradi-ent access for this task. The use of an untargeted formulation sim-plifies test case generation by removing the need to define target transcriptions, while still enabling the discovery of diverse failure cases under perceptual constraints. Several directions can further extend this approach. One op-tion is to incorporate surrogate models that guide the search to-ward semantically meaningful regions in phoneme-level embed-ding space, enabling more controlled exploration. Another direc-tion is to study how latent trajectories relate to semantic changes in transcription, providing a more structured way to steer test case generation. While our approach focuses on inducing transcription errors under perceptual constraints, real-world deployments often involve downstream components such as dialogue managers or de-cision systems, where the impact of misrecognition may be am-plified or mitigated. Investigating how latent-space perturbations Generative Testing of Automated Speech Recognition Systems Conference’17, July 2017, Washington, DC, USA 

propagate through such pipelines would enable a more compre-hensive assessment of system robustness. Finally, extending the method to other speech models and tasks would allow assessing how well the approach generalizes beyond the evaluated setting. 

## 8 Data Availability Statement 

All code and data required to reproduce the results are provided in our anonymized replication package [41], including implemen-tation, experiment scripts, and raw human evaluation data. 

## References 

[1] Hadi Abdullah, Muhammad Sajidur Rahman, Washington Garcia, Kevin Warren, Anurag Swarnim Yadav, Tom Shrimpton, and Patrick Traynor. 2021. Hear” no evil”, see” kenansville”: Efficient and transferable black-box attacks on speech recognition and voice identification systems. In 2021 IEEE Symposium on Security and Privacy (SP) . IEEE, 712–729. [2] Harsh Ahlawat, Naveen Aggarwal, and Deepti Gupta. 2025. Automatic Speech Recognition: A survey of deep learning techniques and approaches. International Journal of Cognitive Computing in Engineering 6 (2025), 201–237. doi:10.1016/j. ijcce.2024.12.007 [3] Harsh Ahlawat, Naveen Aggarwal, and Deepti Gupta. 2025. Automatic Speech Recognition: A survey of deep learning techniques and approaches. International Journal of Cognitive Computing in Engineering 6 (2025), 201–237. [4] Moustafa Alzantot, Bharathan Balaji, and Mani Srivastava. 2018. Did you hear that? adversarial examples against automatic speech recognition. arXiv preprint arXiv:1801.00554 (2018). [5] Dario Amodei, Sundaram Ananthanarayanan, Rishita Anubhai, Jingliang Bai, Eric Battenberg, Carl Case, Jared Casper, Bryan Catanzaro, Qiang Cheng, Guo-liang Chen, et al. 2016. Deep speech 2: End-to-end speech recognition in english and mandarin. In International conference on machine learning . PMLR, 173–182. [6] Muhammad Hilmi Asyrofi, Ferdian Thung, David Lo, and Lingxiao Jiang. 2020. Crossasr: Efficient differential testing of automatic speech recognition via text-to-speech. In 2020 IEEE International Conference on Software Maintenance and Evolution (ICSME) . IEEE, 640–650. [7] Muhammad Hilmi Asyrofi, Zhou Yang, and David Lo. 2021. Crossasr++: A mod-ular differential testing framework for automatic speech recognition. In Proceed-ings of the 29th ACM Joint Meeting on European Software Engineering Conference and Symposium on the Foundations of Software Engineering . 1575–1579. [8] Shenglin Bao, Nan Jiang, Weijie Zhu, and Pei Zhang. 2024. Generative Model-Based Test Case Generation and Operational Testing for Deep Learning. In 2024 5th International Conference on Big Data & Artificial Intelligence & Software En-gineering (ICBASE) . IEEE, 565–570. [9] Marie Biolková and Bac Nguyen. 2022. Neural predictor for black-box adversar-ial attacks on speech recognition. arXiv preprint arXiv:2203.09849 (2022). [10] Steven Bird, Ewan Klein, and Edward Loper. 2009. Natural language processing with Python: analyzing text with the natural language toolkit . ” O’Reilly Media, Inc.”. [11] Igor Buzhinsky, Arseny Nerinovsky, and Stavros Tripakis. 2023. Metrics and methods for robustness evaluation of neural networks with generative models. 

Machine Learning 112, 10 (2023), 3977–4012. [12] Nicholas Carlini and David Wagner. 2017. Towards evaluating the robustness of neural networks. In 2017 ieee symposium on security and privacy (sp) . Ieee, 39–57. [13] Nicholas Carlini and David Wagner. 2018. Audio adversarial examples: Targeted attacks on speech-to-text. In 2018 IEEE security and privacy workshops (SPW) .IEEE, 1–7. [14] William Chan, Navdeep Jaitly, Quoc V Le, and Oriol Vinyals. 2015. Listen, attend and spell. arXiv preprint arXiv:1508.01211 (2015). [15] Xingcheng Chen, Oliver Weissl, and Andrea Stocco. 2026. Feature-Aware Test Generation for Deep Learning Models. arXiv:2601.14081 [cs.SE] https://arxiv. org/abs/2601.14081 [16] Yuxuan Chen, Xuejing Yuan, Jiangshan Zhang, Yue Zhao, Shengzhi Zhang, Kai Chen, and XiaoFeng Wang. 2020. {Devil’s } whisper: A general approach for physical adversarial attacks against commercial black-box speech recognition devices. In 29th USENIX Security Symposium (USENIX Security 20) . 2667–2684. [17] Peng Cheng, Yuwei Wang, Peng Huang, Zhongjie Ba, Xiaodong Lin, Feng Lin, Li Lu, and Kui Ren. 2024. Alif: Low-cost adversarial audio attacks on black-box speech platforms using linguistic features. In 2024 IEEE Symposium on Security and Privacy (SP) . IEEE, 1628–1645. [18] Kalyanmoy Deb, Aravind Pratap, Sameer Agarwal, and TAMT Meyarivan. 2002. A fast and elitist multiobjective genetic algorithm: NSGA-II. IEEE transactions on evolutionary computation 6, 2 (2002), 182–197. [19] Tianyu Du, Shouling Ji, Jinfeng Li, Qinchen Gu, Ting Wang, and Raheem Beyah. 2020. Sirenattack: Generating adversarial audio for end-to-end acoustic systems. In Proceedings of the 15th ACM Asia conference on computer and communications security . 357–369. [20] Zheng Fang, Tao Wang, Lingchen Zhao, Shenyi Zhang, Bowen Li, Yunjie Ge, Qi Li, Chao Shen, and Qian Wang. 2024. Zero-query adversarial attack on black-box automatic speech recognition systems. In Proceedings of the 2024 on ACM SIGSAC Conference on Computer and Communications Security . 630–644. [21] Ian J Goodfellow, Jonathon Shlens, and Christian Szegedy. 2014. Explaining and harnessing adversarial examples. arXiv preprint arXiv:1412.6572 (2014). [22] Alex Graves, Santiago Fernández, Faustino Gomez, and Jürgen Schmidhuber. 2006. Connectionist temporal classification: labelling unsegmented sequence data with recurrent neural networks. In Proceedings of the 23rd international con-ference on Machine learning . 369–376. [23] Nargiz Humbatova, Gunel Jahangirova, Gabriele Bavota, Vincenzo Riccio, An-drea Stocco, and Paolo Tonella. 2020. Taxonomy of Real Faults in Deep Learning Systems. In Proceedings of 42nd International Conference on Software Engineer-ing (Seoul, Republic of Korea) (ICSE ’20) . ACM, New York, NY, USA, 12 pages. doi:10.1145/3377811.3380395 [24] ITU-T. 2003. Mapping function for transforming P.862 raw result scores to MOS-LQO . Recommendation P.862.1. International Telecommunication Union, Telecommunication Standardization Sector, Geneva, Switzerland. [25] ITU-T. 2017. Recommendation ITU-T P.10: Vocabulary for performance and qual-ity of service . ITU-T Recommendation. International Telecommunication Union. https://www.itu.int/rec/T-REC-P.10/en [26] ITU-T Recommendation P.800. 1996. Methods for subjective determination of transmission quality . Technical Report. International Telecommunication Union, Geneva, Switzerland. [27] Pin Ji, Yang Feng, Jia Liu, Zhihong Zhao, and Zhenyu Chen. 2022. ASRTest: automated testing for deep-neural-network-driven speech recognition systems. In Proceedings of the 31st ACM SIGSOFT international symposium on software testing and analysis . 189–201. [28] Sungmin Kang, Robert Feldt, and Shin Yoo. 2020. Sinvad: Search-based image space navigation for dnn image classifier test input generation. In Proceedings of the IEEE/ACM 42nd International Conference on Software Engineering Workshops .521–528. [29] Julia Kokina, Shay Blanchette, Thomas H. Davenport, and Dessislava Pachamanova. 2025. Challenges and opportunities for artificial intelligence in auditing: Evidence from the field. International Journal of Accounting Informa-tion Systems 56 (2025), 100734. doi:10.1016/j.accinf.2025.100734 [30] Jungil Kong, Jaehyeon Kim, and Jaekyoung Bae. 2020. Hifi-gan: Generative ad-versarial networks for efficient and high fidelity speech synthesis. Advances in neural information processing systems 33 (2020), 17022–17033. [31] Yinghao Aaron Li, Cong Han, Vinay Raghavan, Gavin Mischler, and Nima Mes-garani. 2023. Styletts 2: Towards human-level text-to-speech through style dif-fusion and adversarial training with large speech language models. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 36 (2023), 19594–19621. [32] Maryam Maryam, Matteo Biagiola, Andrea Stocco, and Vincenzo Riccio. 2025. Benchmarking Generative AI Models for Deep Learning Test Input Generation. In 2025 IEEE Conference on Software Testing, Verification and Validation (ICST) .IEEE, 174–185. [33] Giorgi Merabishvili, Oliver Weißl, and Andrea Stocco. 2026. Latent Regulariza-tion in Generative Test Input Generation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2602.15552 (2026). [34] George A Miller. 1995. WordNet: a lexical database for English. Commun. ACM 

38, 11 (1995), 39–41. [35] Sondess Missaoui, Simos Gerasimou, and Nicholas Matragkas. 2023. Semantic data augmentation for deep learning testing using generative AI. In 2023 38th IEEE/ACM International Conference on Automated Software Engineering (ASE) .IEEE, 1694–1698. [36] Raphael Olivier and Bhiksha Raj. 2022. There is more than one kind of robust-ness: Fooling whisper with adversarial examples. arXiv preprint arXiv:2210.17316 

(2022). [37] Lawrence Rabiner and Biing-Hwang Juang. 1993. Fundamentals of speech recog-nition . Prentice-Hall, Inc. [38] Alec Radford, Jong Wook Kim, Tao Xu, Greg Brockman, Christine McLeavey, and Ilya Sutskever. 2023. Robust speech recognition via large-scale weak super-vision. In International conference on machine learning . PMLR, 28492–28518. [39] Vyas Raina, Rao Ma, Charles McGhee, Kate Knill, and Mark Gales. 2024. Muting whisper: A universal acoustic adversarial attack on speech foundation models. 

arXiv preprint arXiv:2405.06134 (2024). [40] Sai Sathiesh Rajan, Sakshi Udeshi, and Sudipta Chattopadhyay. 2022. Aequevox: Automated fairness testing of speech recognition systems. In International Con-ference on Fundamental Approaches to Software Engineering . Springer, 245–267. [41] rep-package 2026. Replication Package. https://anonymous.4open.science/r/ GATTS-6FA8. [42] Vincenzo Riccio, Gunel Jahangirova, Andrea Stocco, Nargiz Humbatova, Michael Weiss, and Paolo Tonella. 2020. Testing Machine Learning based Sys-tems: A Systematic Mapping. Empirical Software Engineering (2020). [43] Antony W Rix, John G Beerends, Michael P Hollier, and Andries P Hekstra. 2001. Perceptual evaluation of speech quality (PESQ)-a new method for speech quality Conference’17, July 2017, Washington, DC, USA Trovato et al. 

assessment of telephone networks and codecs. In 2001 IEEE international confer-ence on acoustics, speech, and signal processing. Proceedings (Cat. No. 01CH37221) ,Vol. 2. IEEE, 749–752. [44] Ernst H Rothauser. 1969. IEEE recommended practice for speech quality mea-surements. IEEE Transactions on Audio and Electroacoustics 17, 3 (1969), 225–246. [45] Takaaki Saeki, Detai Xin, Wataru Nakata, Tomoki Koriyama, Shinnosuke Takamichi, and Hiroshi Saruwatari. 2022. UTMOS: UTokyo-SaruLab System for VoiceMOS Challenge 2022. In Proceedings of Interspeech 2022 .[46] Lea Schönherr, Katharina Kohls, Steffen Zeiler, Thorsten Holz, and Dorothea Kolossa. 2018. Adversarial attacks against automatic speech recognition systems via psychoacoustic hiding. arXiv preprint arXiv:1808.05665 (2018). [47] Mona Sloane, Hilke Schellmann, Katelyn Xiaoying Mei, Anna Seo Gyeong Choi, and Allison Koenecke. 2026. The case for stakeholder-driven AI auditing in au-tomatic speech recognition. Nature Machine Intelligence (2026). doi:10.1038/ s42256-026-01207-x [48] Yang Song, Rui Shu, Nate Kushman, and Stefano Ermon. 2018. Constructing unrestricted adversarial examples with generative models. Advances in neural information processing systems 31 (2018). [49] Christian Szegedy, Wojciech Zaremba, Ilya Sutskever, Joan Bruna, Dumitru Er-han, Ian Goodfellow, and Rob Fergus. 2013. Intriguing properties of neural net-works. arXiv preprint arXiv:1312.6199 (2013). [50] Rohan Taori, Amog Kamsetty, Brenton Chu, and Nikita Vemuri. 2019. Targeted adversarial examples for black box audio systems. In 2019 IEEE security and pri-vacy workshops (SPW) . IEEE, 15–20. [51] Ashish Vaswani, Noam Shazeer, Niki Parmar, Jakob Uszkoreit, Llion Jones, Aidan N Gomez, Łukasz Kaiser, and Illia Polosukhin. 2017. Attention is all you need. Advances in neural information processing systems 30 (2017). [52] Yuxuan Wang, RJ Skerry-Ryan, Daisy Stanton, Yonghui Wu, Ron J Weiss, Navdeep Jaitly, Zongheng Yang, Ying Xiao, Zhifeng Chen, Samy Bengio, et al. 2017. Tacotron: Towards end-to-end speech synthesis. arXiv preprint arXiv:1703.10135 (2017). [53] Oliver Weißl, Amr Abdellatif, Xingcheng Chen, Giorgi Merabishvili, Vincenzo Riccio, Severin Kacianka, and Andrea Stocco. 2025. Targeted deep learning sys-tem boundary testing. ACM Transactions on Software Engineering and Methodol-ogy (2025). [54] Oliver Weißl, Vincenzo Riccio, Severin Kacianka, and Andrea Stocco. 2026. HyperNet-Adaptation for Diffusion-Based Test Case Generation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2601.15041 (2026). [55] Frank Wilcoxon. 1945. Individual Comparisons by Ranking Methods. Biometrics Bulletin 1, 6 (dec 1945), 80. doi:10.2307/3001968 [56] Yi Xie, Zhuohang Li, Cong Shi, Jian Liu, Yingying Chen, and Bo Yuan. 2021. Enabling fast and universal audio adversarial attack using generative model. In 

Proceedings of the AAAI conference on artificial intelligence , Vol. 35. 14129–14137. [57] Zhiyuan Yu, Yuanhaur Chang, Ning Zhang, and Chaowei Xiao. 2023. {SMACK }:Semantically meaningful adversarial audio attack. In 32nd USENIX security sym-posium (USENIX security 23) . 3799–3816. [58] Guoming Zhang, Xiaohui Ma, Huiting Zhang, Riccardo Spolaor, Yanni Yang, Xi-aoyu Ji, Xiuzhen Cheng, and Pengfei Hu. 2025. UltraAdv: An Ultrasonic Adver-sarial Attack on Black-Box Speech Recognition Systems. IEEE Transactions on Mobile Computing (2025). [59] Guoming Zhang, Chen Yan, Xiaoyu Ji, Tianchen Zhang, Taimin Zhang, and Wenyuan Xu. 2017. Dolphinattack: Inaudible voice commands. In Proceedings of the 2017 ACM SIGSAC conference on computer and communications security .103–117. [60] Zhengli Zhao, Dheeru Dua, and Sameer Singh. 2017. Generating natural adver-sarial examples. arXiv preprint arXiv:1710.11342 (2017). [61] Baolin Zheng, Peipei Jiang, Qian Wang, Qi Li, Chao Shen, Cong Wang, Yunjie Ge, Qingyang Teng, and Shenyi Zhang. 2021. Black-box adversarial attacks on commercial speech platforms with minimal information. In Proceedings of the 2021 ACM SIGSAC conference on computer and communications security . 86–107.