Title: Towards Robust Sequential Decomposition for Complex Image Editing

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2605.09233v1

Published Time: Tue, 12 May 2026 01:34:30 GMT

Number of Pages: 25

Markdown Content:
# Towards Robust Sequential Decomposition for Complex Image Editing 

Zilai Zeng 1,2,* Mingdeng Cao 3 Zijie Li 2 Xiaochen Lian 2 Yichun Shi 2

Peihao Zhu 2 Chen Sun 1 Peng Wang 21Brown University 2ByteDance Seed 3The University of Tokyo 

Abstract 

Recent advances in visual generative models have en-abled high-fidelity image editing guided by human instruc-tions. However, these models often struggle with complex instructions involving combinatorial editing operations or inter-step dependencies. This difficulty stems from the lim-itations of two canonical paradigms: (1) single-turn edit-ing, which attempts to apply all instructed edits in one pass, often fails to parse the complex instruction accu-rately and causes undesired edits; and (2) sequential edit-ing can decompose the task into simpler steps but suffers from compounding errors introduced by the sequential ex-ecution, leading to low-fidelity results. To derive a ro-bust solution for complex image editing, we examine edit-ing behaviors of different paradigms under a unified in-context editing framework, and study how the benefits of sequential decomposition can be balanced against its error-accumulation drawbacks. We further develop a synthetic data pipeline that constructs editing tasks of varying in-struction complexity, allowing us to curate a large-scale editing dataset with high-quality decomposed sequences. By finetuning on synthetic data, we discovered that with properly designed editing paradigms, sequential decompo-sition yields robust improvements even as task complexity increases. Furthermore, the decomposition skills learned from synthetic tasks can transfer to real images by co-training with real-world editing data, demonstrating the promise of sim-to-real generalization for tackling complex image editing across broader domains. 

1. Introduction 

Image generative models have achieved remarkable progress in synthesizing high-quality visual content aligned with user instructions, unlocking a wide range of applica-tions in text-to-image (T2I) generation [2, 13, 21, 25, 26, 28] and user instruction-guided image editing [3, 36, 43]. While state-of-the-art T2I models can generate visually 

> *Work done when ZZ was an intern at ByteDance Gemini 2.5 Flash Image

Source Image 

Target Image 

> Our Approach

(1) Single -Turn Editing 

(2) Sequential Editing 

Figure 1. Single-Turn Editing versus Sequential Editing with a complex instruction: ”Move the speaker onto the modern coffee table, move the all-purpose cleaner forward, then add a shaver on the floor near the speaker, and replace the lightbulb with a basket-ball”. Incorrect edits are labeled with red boxes on the image. 

compelling images from complex instructions, their coun-terparts for image editing are often limited to handling a 

single type of edit or restricted target regions , standing in stark contrast to real-world scenarios that usually demand more compositional modifications. To enable complex image editing from instructions con-taining combinatorial editing operations, a model must first identify distinct edits specified by the instruction and then apply them to their corresponding target regions in the source image. Two straightforward paradigms can be con-sidered for this task: (1) single-turn editing, which performs all required edits in a single step, and (2) sequential edit-ing, which decomposes the complex instruction into simpler sub-edits and executes them sequentially. However, nei-ther paradigm reliably produces accurate results under com-plex instructions. Single-turn editing often yields incom-plete or even wrong edits because the model must simul-taneously recognize and execute multiple operations from a compounded instruction. Conversely, although sequen-tial editing intuitively simplifies the task through decom-position, it in practice suffers from severe error accumula-1

> arXiv:2605.09233v1 [cs.CV] 10 May 2026

tion [24, 29, 40, 42, 44], where inaccuracies introduced in early steps propagate through subsequent ones, ultimately degrading the fidelity of the final result. As shown in Fig-ure 1, Gemini 2.5 Flash Image [33] fails to perform correct edits in either single-turn or sequential editing, with sequen-tial editing yielding more undesired modifications. In this work, we aim to develop a robust solution that addresses complex image editing via sequential decomposi-tion. The core challenge lies in achieving an effective trade-off between the advantages of multi-step instruction decom-position and its accompanying issues of error accumula-tion. To examine this trade-off, we study sequential editing through the lens of in-context editing framework [22, 24], where a multimodal model generates interleaved sequences of decomposed instructions and their corresponding edited images while conditioning on the full history of contextual inputs. This formulation unifies different editing paradigms within a single model and enables a fair comparison of their behaviors. More importantly, by conditioning each edit on rich contextual history, in-context editing makes sequential decompositions more informed and adaptive to intermedi-ate outcomes, while opening up more editing paradigms to explore. These properties make in-context editing a com-pelling framework for investigating and improving sequen-tial decomposition in complex image editing scenarios. To profile editing paradigms under different task com-plexities, we develop a synthetic data generation pipeline in Blender, where editing tasks are curated by manipulating procedurally generated scenes with a set of atomic editing operations. The pipeline sequentially performs a varying number of editing operations to generate editing sequences, constructing complex tasks by treating the initial scene ren-dering as the source image and the concatenation of edit-ing operations as the corresponding instruction. Since each operation deterministically modifies the scene, the pipeline can produce sequences of “decomposed” steps with consis-tently accurate edits, along with a reference target image rendered from the final scene. To further enhance task com-plexity, we introduce inter-step dependencies, in which the instruction of a later operation requires referencing results from earlier edits (as illustrated in Figure 2). This pipeline not only provides a controlled environment for analyzing editing behaviors, where we can modulate task complexity by adjusting the editing length and the dependency ratio, but also enables scalable curation of high-quality editing chains of arbitrary length and dependency without degradation. We instantiate our in-context editing framework with unified model BAGEL [10] and finetune it on synthetic edit-ing sequences curated from our pipeline to induce sequen-tial decomposition behaviors. Using the finetuned model, we implement different editing paradigms during inference and evaluate their performance on unseen synthetic tasks of varying complexity. We find that several state-of-the-art editing models suffer performance drops when sequential editing is applied in a zero-shot manner; in contrast, de-composition capabilities learned through our approach not only improve editing performance compared to single-turn editing baselines, but also continue to benefit from addi-tional decomposition steps. Notably, context-guided se-quential editing, a paradigm that can flexibly modulate the impact from prior editing results, consistently yields ro-bust improvements across various settings and achieves the best GPT-evaluated scores on tasks with inter-step depen-dencies. This demonstrates that robust sequential decom-position can be enabled by training on high-quality edit-ing sequences, integrated with a well-designed inference paradigm. Furthermore, to transfer the decomposition skills to the real-world domain, we finetune BAGEL on a mixture of synthetic editing sequences and real-world single-turn editing pairs. We find that the two-step context-guided edit-ing successfully improves both instruction following and identity preservation on complex real-world editing tasks, highlighting the promise of sim-to-real transfer for enhanc-ing complex image editing across broader domains. 

2. Related Work 

In-Context Editing. In-context editing [22, 24] built on unified multimodal models [1, 8, 10, 32, 39] has emerged as a powerful framework that performs edits based on mul-timodal contexts composed of text and previously gener-ated images. VINCE [24] acquires in-context editing ca-pabilities from large-scale video data, and demonstrates strong multi-turn editing performance with segmentation mask prediction. In our work, we investigate how to derive an effective sequential decomposition strategy within the in-context editing framework to improve editing performance beyond single-turn editing robustly. We base our investi-gation upon BAGEL [10], a unified model with strong per-formance on existing single-turn editing benchmarks, and study whether and how multi-step sequential decomposition can facilitate complex image editing. 

Data Construction for Image Editing. High-quality data construction is essential to the success of visual generative models. Prior work [3, 29, 42, 43] has developed auto-matic pipelines that utilize off-the-shelf image editing mod-els to obtain target images for instruction-based image edit-ing. These approaches are designed for efficient data gener-ation, but are difficult to maintain data quality without care-fully designed supervision. We build our data construction pipeline with Blender, which has precise control over the vi-sual changes made by every editing operation and allows us to construct synthetic tasks of varying complexity without quality degradation from sequential modifications. 

Editing with Complex Instructions. Many instruction-based image editing datasets and benchmarks focus on tasks 2Object Assets   

> &
> Materials
> 2. Sequentially Apply Randomly Sampled Editing Operations
> 1. Scene
> Initialization
> Viewpoint
> Change Background
> Change
> “Tilt the camera up” “Change the floor
> and walls to tiles”
> …
> Object
> Translation

Dependency Injector    

> “Move the object that was
> recolored near the table” …
> Complex
> Instruction
> Source Image Target Image

Figure 2. Overview of Synthetic Data Pipeline . We build the synthetic data pipeline on Blender, in which we construct complex editing tasks by sequentially applying editing operations on a randomly initialized scene. After constructing the editing chain, we take the initial and final rendering of the scene as the editing pair and concatenate all operation descriptions as the corresponding complex instruction. 

with a single editing type or restricted targeted regions, limiting their applications in real-world scenarios where more complex edits are needed. Recent work [40] proposes benchmarks with more complicated editing instructions, where each task comprises edits of various types across multiple objects, and attempts to decompose the task via sequential editing. However, even the state-of-the-art edit-ing models [1, 22, 33, 37] suffer from severe compounding errors and cause low-fidelity results after sequential execu-tion. To overcome the challenge of collecting high-quality decomposed steps on real images for model training across varying task complexities, we acquire decomposition super-vision from synthetic tasks and transfer to the real image domain by co-training with real-world editing data. 

3. Synthetic Data Generation 

To systematically investigate the editing behaviors of differ-ent paradigms across varying task complexities, we develop a Blender-based synthetic data generation pipeline (as in Figure 2) that constructs complex editing tasks by sequen-tially modifying a randomly initialized scene with atomic editing operations. In Section 3.1, we outline atomic edit-ing operations for the editing task curation. In Section 3.2, we describe the workflow of the automatic pipeline that sup-ports task construction with varied complexity. 

3.1. Editing Operations 

A diverse set of editing types is essential for constructing complex tasks. We equip our pipeline with 10 different editing operations, which can be divided into three main categories: (1) Local editing focuses on object-level mod-ifications, including addition, removal, replacement, trans-lation, rotation, size change, color change, as well as ma-terial change operations; (2) Background change operation replaces the textures of the structural planes (e.g. the floor and walls) to alter the visual appearances of the scene back-ground; (3) Viewpoint change operation adjusts the camera positions by translating (forward or backward), tilting (up or down), panning (left or right) and yawing (left or right). Each editing operation can produce distinct visual out-comes depending on its specific parameters, which are ran-domly sampled during the data generation process to en-hance data diversity. Furthermore, we provide language de-scriptions for each operation by completing the predefined templates with sampled parameters. More details regarding editing operation design can be found in Appendix A. 

3.2. Automatic Data Pipeline 

Many existing editing datasets are curated using pretrained generative models, whose quality can be upper-bounded by the failure modes of these models. To circumvent this, we build our pipeline on Blender, which guarantees authentic edits by predefined operations and image quality through advanced photorealistic rendering. The workflow of the data generation pipeline is outlined below. 

Scene Initialization. Given a set of 3D object assets and material textures, we procedurally initialize a scene by con-structing an empty room inside Blender, with random tex-tures applied to the floor and wall planes. We then sample up to N different objects and place them on the room floor in a non-collision layout guaranteed by running physics simulations. This creates an initial scene state whose visual complexity depends on object diversity N and their spatial relationships. The rendering of the initial scene will be col-lected as the source image I0 for editing tasks. 

Editing Chain Composition. To construct a complex edit-ing task, we sample an L-length chain of editing opera-tions, each paired with a language description {Ti}Li=1 . We then sequentially apply those operations to the initialized 3scene, and treat the final rendered image as the target of the editing task IL. Meanwhile, as we step through all transitions in the editing chain, we can collect these inter-mediate renderings {Ii}Li=1 as decomposed editing steps with per-step instruction labels. Finally, we concatenate the descriptions of the editing operations to form a com-plex instruction Tc = Concat ({Ti}Li=1 ). Each generated example comprises an editing triplet (I0, T c, I L) along with the decomposed steps {(Ti, I i)}Li=1 . Our method performs each editing operation deterministically, ensuring authentic scene modifications and consistently high-quality decom-position annotations regardless of editing length. 

Inter-Step Dependency Injection. When all randomly sampled operations are independent and can be executed in parallel, it reduces task complexity even when the length of the editing chain ( L) grows. To further enhance task com-plexity, we inject inter-step dependencies into the task in-struction by requiring later operations to reference the re-sults of earlier edits. This design forces the model to first reason over the dependencies to clarify the intended editing operations before executing them. We introduce two types of dependency: (1) operation reference, which selects an object that has been modified in a previous operation and refers to it through its historical edit rather than its explicit name. For example, if a table was rotated in an earlier step, a subsequent instruction may identify it as “the object that was rotated” instead of “the table”. Notably, we only use reference-based description for objects in overall complex instructions, and reveal their actual labels in decomposed instructions ; and (2) position reference, which specifically applies to object addition and translation operations, is im-plemented by specifying the target position as the original location of an object before it was moved by an earlier op-eration. For example, if a chair was moved or removed in an earlier step, a later addition instruction may say, ”Add a book where the chair originally was”. When constructing an editing chain with inter-step dependencies, we decide for each operation after the first, independently with probability 

pd, whether to inject a dependency on an earlier edit. 

4. Method 

We investigate sequential decomposition through in-context editing framework, in which a multimodal model gen-erates interleaved sequences of editing instructions and their corresponding results based on contextual inputs. This framework allows us to implement various editing paradigms within a single model and to study their be-haviors from a unified perspective. Moreover, access-ing rich historical contexts not only makes the sequen-tial decomposition process more informed, but also en-ables the exploration of a broader set of sequential edit-ing paradigms. Given a complex editing instruction Tc

and a source image I0, our framework sequentially gener-ates interleaved editing sequences in the following format: 

< Tc, I 0, T 1, I 1, ..., T L, I L >, in which {Ti}Li=1 are de-composed instructions, {Ii}L−1 

> i=1

denote intermediate edit-ing outcomes with IL being the final result for the task. 

4.1. Model Finetuning 

Although many multimodal models are capable of generat-ing interleaved sequences, they usually do not exhibit spe-cialized sequential decomposition behaviors by default due to their general pretraining objectives. To enable such capa-bilities, we finetune the model by jointly optimizing the fol-lowing training objectives: (1) Instruction Decomposition: given the complex instruction Tc, the source image I0, and all intermediate images {Ii}L−1 

> i=1

, the model is trained to au-toregressively predict decomposed instructions between the consecutive images according to the following objective: 

LD = − X

> i

X

> j

log pθ (Ti,j | Ti,<j , T <i , I <i , T c) (1) , in which j denotes the token index in per-step instruc-tion Ti. (2) In-Context Editing: the model takes as input the source image I0, and all decomposed text-image pairs 

{(Ii, T i)}Li=1 , in which subsequent image or text tokens may attend to the preceding ones to comprehend context information, and is trained with rectified flow objective on the intermediate and target images {Ii}Li=1 :

LICE = Et,X 0,X 1 [|| (X1 − X0) − vθ (Xt, t, c )|| 2] (2) . Assuming we optimize the above objective over the VAE latent space, X1 represents the clean VAE tokens from 

{Ii}Li=1 , Xt = tX 1 + (1 − t)X0 is the noisified latent constructed through linear interpolation between clean VAE tokens and Gaussian noises X0 ∼ N (0 , I ), vθ is the ve-locity prediction network, and c is the multimodal context, i.e. c = {I<i , T ≤i} for Ii. Note that we do not include the overall complex instruction Tc in the context c for this training task. This decoupled design allows the generation module to edit images based solely on decomposed instruc-tions without interference from the complex instruction. (3) Single-Turn Editing: the model follows the same objective in Eq. 2, with c being the tuple of the source image and the overall complex instruction (I0, T c). This objective retains single-turn editing capabilities by asking the model to edit from I0 to IL in a single step. 

4.2. Versatile Editing Paradigms 

To support customizable decomposition granularity dur-ing inference, we regroup training sequence {(Ti, I i)}Li=1 

into K chunks ( 1 ≤ K ≤ L) randomly, in which each chunk contains a concatenation of l decomposed instruc-tions {Tj , ..., T j+l−1} and their editing result Ij+l−1, and 4omits {Ij+k}l−2

> k=0

. We then finetune the model to automat-ically decompose the task into varying numbers of chunks as specified by the value of K appended to the complex in-struction Tc. Specifically, K = 1 reduces the objective to single-turn editing as all intermediate images will be omit-ted; by setting K = L, the model is finetuned over original decomposed sequences. Furthermore, when optimizing in-context editing, we randomly drop text and clean image to-kens from the context to enable classifier-free guidance for interleaved generation, which encompasses versatile edit-ing paradigms during inference. We outline three different editing paradigms enabled by our unified framework below. 

Single-Turn Editing. As described above, we can imple-ment single-turn editing by appending K = 1 to the overall complex instruction. The model will first generate a com-positional instruction ˆTc as the concatenation of all decom-posed operations, and then directly edit the source image 

I0 following ˆTc. When handling instructions with opera-tion reference, the model will translate the reference-based descriptions and reveal the explicit object labels in ˆTc.

Full-Context Sequential Editing (FCSE). When K > 1,the model decomposes the instruction into K groups of ed-its, each followed by the generation of their corresponding editing result. When generating Ii, we fix the historical editing sequence {T<i , I <i −1} as input, and compute guid-ance with Ti and Ii−1 respectively to emphasize the impact from the current decomposed instruction as well as the last editing result. We term this paradigm as Full-Context Sequential Editing, and compute CFG as follows: vFCSE =

vθ (Xt, t, {T<i , I <i −1}) + γI (vθ (Xt, t, {T<i , I <i }) − vθ (

Xt, t, {T<i , I <i −1})) + γT (vθ (Xt, t, {T≤i, I <i }) −

vθ (Xt, t, {T<i , I <i })) 

Context-Guided Sequential Editing (CGSE). In full-context sequential editing, the error introduced by previous editing results might accumulate through sequential execu-tion, leading to degraded performance. We can mitigate this by isolating prior editing results as a separate guid-ance term whose strength can be modulated by a coefficient 

γctx . For every step i, we start with the velocity vd that di-rectly edits I0 to Ii by computing CFG with source image 

I0 and the concatenation of the decomposed instructions 

{Tj }ij=1 : vd = vθ (Xt, t ) + γI (vθ (Xt, t, I 0) − vθ (Xt, t )) + 

γT (vθ (Xt, t, I 0, {Tj }ij=1 ) − vθ (Xt, t, I 0)) . Then, we apply the guidance from contextual editing results (termed ”con-text guidance”) on top of vd, with a strength coefficient γctx 

regulating its effect on the current edit. Moreover, we can arbitrarily select historical edits to compose a guidance con-text: vCGSE = vd + γctx (vθ (Xt, t, I 0, {Tj }ij=1 , {Ij }nj=m) −

vd), where m ≤ n < i . For example, we can include all pre-vious editing results {Ij }i−1 

> j=1

for context guidance compu-tation; alternatively, we can use the last image Ii−1 alone to highlight its impact on the result. Compared to full-context sequential editing, this paradigm provides more control over the influence from history edits through γctx and the guid-ance context composition, allowing us to balance the auxil-iary effect against the error introduced by the task decom-position. More details can be found in Table A2. 

4.3. Co-training with Real-World Editing Data 

While the synthetic data pipeline enables scalable task cu-ration with varying complexity, finetuning models solely on synthetic data limits their applicability to broader domains. To transfer the decomposition skills learned from synthetic tasks to real-world scenarios, we finetune our model on a mixture of synthetic editing sequences with decomposi-tion annotations and single-turn editing data on real images. This allow us to effectively combines the large-scale and high-quality data from both domains, allowing the model to transfer decomposition abilities obtained from synthetic tasks while retaining editing capability on real images. 

5. Experiment 

In this section, we first evaluate different editing paradigms under various task complexities in the synthetic domain and investigate how decomposition should be properly utilized to facilitate image editing tasks as complexity increases. Then, we study whether the decomposition skills learned from synthetic tasks can generalize to real-world editing tasks by co-training with real editing data. 

5.1. Experimental Setup 

Synthetic Data Generation. We use 2,246 3D assets from Digital Twin Catalog [12] and PolyHaven [15] for easy ac-cess to their semantic labels, and 1,866 materials from CC0 Textures [34] as basic elements for scene construction. Un-der our pipeline, we generate a large-scale editing dataset that includes 60K editing sequences by naively chaining random operations and 34K sequences with historical de-pendency injected. We initialize every scene with up to 

N = 9 objects and vary L from 3 to 17 to construct edit-ing chains with a varying number of operations, and set 

pd = 0 .5 when inter-step dependencies are enabled. De-tailed dataset analysis is provided in Appendix A.5. 

Implementation Details. We instantiate our in-context editing framework with BAGEL [10], a unified multimodal model that natively supports interleaved generation of mul-timodal sequences, and finetune it on curated synthetic data with the hyperparameters provided in Appendix B. Then we implement different editing paradigms at inference time as described in Section 4.2 for evaluation. To mitigate com-pounding errors in context-guided sequential editing, we take the editing result from the previous step alone to com-pute context guidance. To transfer decomposition skills to the real-world domain, we separately finetune BAGEL on 5Table 1. Evaluations on tasks without inter-step dependencies. 

“FCSE” denotes “Full-Context Sequential Editing” and “CGSE” denotes “Context-Guided Sequential Editing” with γctx = 2 .5.                                                                       

> Independent Chain Single-Turn Editing Sequential Editing DINO-I ↑DINO-D ↑GPT-5 ↑DINO-I ↑DINO-D ↑GPT-5 ↑
> Qwen-Image 0.614 0.372 2.27 ---GPT-4o* 0.564 0.411 5.35 0.506 0.393 4.61
> Gemini 2.5 Flash Image 0.693 0.425 3.88 0.676 0.446 4.09 BAGEL (Zero-Shot) 0.541 0.385 2.43 0.500 0.372 2.24 BAGEL (Finetuned) 0.756 0.576 4.0 ---w/ FCSE ( K= 3 )---0.738 0.557 4.14 w/ FCSE ( K= 5 )---0.711 0.529 4.16 w/ CGSE ( K= 3 )---0.749 0.562 4.15 w/ CGSE ( K= 5 )---0.737 0.549 4.20

a mixture of the curated synthetic data and the single-turn editing data from Pico-Banana [23]. As BAGEL is pre-trained on large-scale real-world datasets, we optimize the model for 1,000 steps to investigate whether our framework enables efficient sim-to-real generalization. 

Benchmarks. To evaluate different editing paradigms on synthetic tasks of varying complexity, we generate 500 edit-ing sequences using unseen objects for two settings: (1) naive operation chains without inter-step dependencies (In-dependent Chain), and (2) operation chains augmented with inter-step dependencies (Dependent Chain), in which each instruction has at least one operation that require referenc-ing a historical edit. The number of editing operations and the ratio of dependent operations are evenly distributed in each setting when applicable. To evaluate sim-to-real gen-eralization, we use Complex-Edit [40], a benchmark con-structed to evaluate editing performance with complex in-structions. We take 531 tasks from their real image edit-ing split and supply the model with the concatenation of 8 atomic instructions from each task for evaluation. 

Metrics. To evaluate editing performance on synthetic tasks, we follow prior work [6, 7, 42] to adopt two simi-larity metrics based on DINOv3 [31] features, DINO-I and DINO-D, to measure the visual discrepancy between gen-erated images and reference target images. We compute DINO-D as cos (C(Igen ) − C(Isrc ), C(Itgt ) − C(Isrc )) to measure similarity over editing directions, where C denotes DINOv3 encoder, and Isrc , I tgt , I gen denote the source im-age, the target image and the generated image respectively. However, since most editing operations modify only one object that occupies a local region of the entire scene and cause small pixel-wise changes, high similarity scores can be achieved when the evaluated images share similar back-grounds. To address this, we also employ GPT-5 to evalu-ate whether the edited image accurately reflects all changes requested by the complex instruction without introducing unintended edits. For each result, GPT-5 assigns a score from 0 to 10, with 10 indicating a perfect edit. In sim-to-real evaluations, we adopt the VLM-based metrics from Complex-Edit, which measure the quality of editing results 

Table 2. Evaluations on tasks with inter-step dependencies. 

“FCSE” denotes “Full-Context Sequential Editing” and “CGSE” denotes “Context-Guided Sequential Editing” with γctx = 2 .5.                                                                       

> Dependent Chain Single-Turn Editing Sequential Editing DINO-I ↑DINO-D ↑GPT-5 ↑DINO-I ↑DINO-D ↑GPT-5 ↑
> Qwen-Image 0.632 0.358 2.02 ---GPT-4o* 0.579 0.388 3.77 0.507 0.370 3.09 Gemini 2.5 Flash Image 0.712 0.408 3.23 0.698 0.419 3.28 BAGEL (Zero-Shot) 0.579 0.372 2.17 0.552 0.382 2.03 BAGEL (Finetuned) 0.776/ 0.791 0.553/ 0.578 3.57/ 3.91 ---w/ FCSE ( K= 3 )---0.756 0.536 4.06 w/ FCSE ( K= 5 )---0.723 0.509 4.13
> w/ CGSE ( K= 3 )---0.779 0.555 4.04 w/ CGSE ( K= 5 )---0.762 0.533 4.14

from three dimensions: Instruction Following (IF), Identity Preservation (IP), and Perceptual Quality (PQ). 

5.2. Complex Image Editing in Synthetic Domain 

In Table 1, we compare single-turn editing against sequen-tial editing paradigms on 500 unseen editing tasks with-out inter-step dependencies, and report the zero-shot edit-ing performance for four editing model baselines, Qwen-Image [38], GPT-4o [22], Gemini 2.5 Flash Image [33], and BAGEL (Zero-Shot) [10]. In a sequential editing setup, we decompose the instruction by default into 3 steps for base-line models. We observe that both BAGEL (Zero-Shot) and GPT-4o suffer from severe performance degradation during sequential editing, underscoring the challenge of reliably improving performance through naive task decomposition. After finetuning on synthetic data, we find that BAGEL achieves strong single-turn editing performance that sur-passes all baselines except for GPT-4o. Meanwhile, ef-fective improvements are achieved by both full-context se-quential editing and context-guided editing paradigms, as indicated by the GPT-based metric. We also note that nearly all methods exhibit a decline in similarity metrics after ap-plying sequential editing. We attribute this to the sensitivity of pretrained visual features to the inevitable artifacts in-troduced during sequential editing, where even minor arti-facts that do not affect the semantic correctness of the edit can compromise feature similarity. While both sequential editing paradigms can benefit from increased decomposi-tion steps, CGSE remains robust on similarity metrics, high-lighting its resilience to potential compounding errors. Table 2 shows the editing performance on tasks where inter-step dependencies are introduced to enhance com-plexity. In this setting, effective decomposition requires more than simply dissecting the instruction; it also demands translating the embedded dependencies to clarify the in-tended editing operations. We discovered that all baseline methods achieve lower performance on tasks with inter-step dependencies, which reflects the genuine difficulty intro-duced by inter-step dependencies. Additionally, we report two single-turn editing performances for finetuned BAGEL, in which the first number corresponds to the performance 6Source  Target  Single -Turn Editing   

> Context -Guided Sequential Editing (K=3) Gemini 2.5 Flash Image (Three -Step)
> GPT -4o (Single -Turn) Gemini (Single -Turn) Qwen -Image Figure 3. Qualitative comparisons on a synthetic task with inter-step dependency. Instruction: “Remove the hatchet, replace the basketball with a shoe, relocate the wifi router where the hatchet initially was, and paint the object that was moved red”. “Single-Turn Editing” refers to the single-turn editing result from finetuned BAGEL. Red boxes indicate incorrect edits. More examples can be found in Appendix E.

where the model directly edits the image based on the com-plex instruction with operation references, and the second number shows the performance using the instruction clari-fied by the model as described in Section 4.2. We observe that our finetuned model achieves the best performance on both single-turn and sequential editing setups when the de-pendencies are clarified. Notably, 3-step context-guided editing outperforms all sequential editing methods on simi-larity metrics, and 5-step context-guided editing obtains the best GPT-evaluated score. Figure 3 illustrates that context-guided editing successfully resolves the task with inter-step dependencies through sequential decomposition, whereas single-turn editing and other baselines fail. This again demonstrates that the benefits of sequential decomposition can outweigh its drawbacks from error accumulation, en-abling robust improvement on complex image editing. 

Task Complexity Analysis. The number of editing oper-ations encoded in the instruction is a primary factor con-tributing to task complexity. In Table 3, we group tasks into 4 bins based on the number of editing operations and report the aggregated GPT-based scores of each editing paradigm. We show that all editing paradigms encounter a performance drop when the number of editing operations increases. However, sequential decomposition consistently outperforms single-turn editing even when the length of the editing chain grows. Both sequential editing paradigms achieve their best performance with 5 decomposed steps. For each task, we also consider the ratio of editing op-erations that are dependent on previous edits as another complexity dimension. In Table 4, we compare editing paradigms under different ranges of task dependency ra-tio, and observe that the gains from sequential decompo-sition remain robust across all settings. Specifically, the                                                           

> Table 3. Analysis with different numbers of editing operations
> # Editing Operations 3-5 6-9 10-13 >13 Single-Turn Editing 4.18/4.28 3.61/4.19 3.43/3.68 3.19/3.56 FCSE ( K= 3 )4.67 4.27 3.84 3.58 FCSE ( K= 5 )4.56 4.38 3.97 3.70
> CGSE ( K= 3 )4.75 4.19 3.83 3.56 CGSE ( K= 5 )4.81 4.29 4.02 3.58
> Table 4. Analysis with different dependency ratios
> Dependency Ratio 0-0.2 0.2-0.4 0.4-0.6 >0.6 Single-Turn Editing 3.92/3.94 3.62/3.93 3.22/3.71 3.29/4.46 FCSE ( K= 3 )4.05 4.02 3.96 4.78
> FCSE ( K= 5 )4.34 4.04 4.13 3.96 CGSE ( K= 3 )4.16 3.97 4.08 4.07 CGSE ( K= 5 )4.22 4.23 3.75 4.75

3-step context-guided paradigm achieves the best perfor-mance over [0.4, 0.6], whereas the 5-step full-context se-quential editing and context-guided editing paradigms per-form best in the [0, 0.2] and [0.2, 0.4] ranges, respectively. We note that an excessively high dependency ratio ( e.g .

> 0.6) may indicate short editing chains with low task com-plexity, in which high performance is easier to achieve. 

5.3. Sim-to-Real Generalization 

To study whether the sequential decomposition skills learned from the synthetic domain can efficiently generalize to real-world editing, we finetune BAGEL on a mixture of synthetic editing sequences and single-turn real-world edit-ing data for 1,000 steps. In Table 5, we report the perfor-mance for four models under different editing paradigms on Complex-Edit [40]: (1) BAGEL-Zero-Shot, (2) BAGEL-S, where only synthetic editing sequences are used for finetun-ing, (3) BAGEL-R, in which only single-turn real editing 7Source Image  BAGEL -R      

> (Single -Turn)
> BAGEL -SR
> (Single -Turn)
> BAGEL -SR
> (Context -Guided, K=2)
> ”Replace the coffee table with a glass -top variety, alter the color of the sofa to dark grey, dim the chandelier brightness, int roduce a stack of books neatly arranged on the coffee table, swap the
> curtains for velvet midnight blue ones, change the wall surface to a textured stone effect, add a cozy evening glow filter, a nd introduce faint specks of dust floating, illuminated by the lighting.”
> “Replace the sky with a dramatic, bright sunset sky, include a group of ski trackers in the distance on the snowy plains, app ly a light snowfall effect across the scene, shrink the snowboard to make it
> slightly smaller, change the snowboard's design to an icy blue pattern, brighten the snowy plains for sharper contrast, add a li ght bloom effect at the horizon where the mountains meet the sunset,
> and crop the edges to center the snowboard.”
> “Replace the ball in the dog's mouth with a frisbee, replace the beach with a large grassy park, add another identical dog to th e grassy area running toward the first dog, add motion blur to the
> dog's movement, add a soft sunset glow, adjust the second dog's fur color to light brown, place a bench in the background of the park, and enhance the light reflections on the grass corresponding
> to the sunset.”

Figure 4. Qualitative comparisons on real-world editing tasks. BAGEL-SR (CGSE, K=2) exhibits stronger detail-preserving abil-ities compared to the baselines. See more results in Appendix E. 

data is used for finetuning, and (4) BAGEL-SR, where we finetune BAGEL on both synthetic and real editing data. The results from BAGEL-Zero-Shot and BAGEL-R show that naively decomposing the task into multiple steps leads to performance degradation across all metrics, and finetuning on synthetic data alone does not naturally en-able generalization. However, we find that when co-training with real editing data, synthetic data enables effective im-provements over identity preservation, with context-guided editing paradigms consistently outperforming single-turn baselines. In Figure 4, we observe that BAGEL-SR with context-guided editing indeed exhibits stronger detail-preserving capabilities. We hypothesize that synthetic edit-ing sequences provide dense supervision signals that pre-serve unedited scene elements during training, and such ca-pabilities can be effectively transferred to real-world editing tasks. Moreover, we observe that two-step context-guided editing performs the best on instruction following and iden-tity preservation, reaffirming that the decomposition skills learned from synthetic data can be further utilized to im-prove real-world editing with complex instructions. 24.8% 

> 31.9%
> 43.3%
> IF&IP
> 37.7%
> 29.2%
> 33.1%
> PQ
> 28.2%
> 33.3%
> 38.5%
> Overall
> R (Single-Turn)
> SR (K=1)
> SR (K=2, CGSE)

Figure 5. Human Preference Study on Complex-Edit. 

Additionally, we perform a human preference study with 33 participants. Each participant was assigned 15 random tests comparing editing results from three finetuned BAGEL models—R (Single-Turn), SR ( K = 1 ), and SR ( K = 2 ,CGSE, γctx = 0 .5). Each test asks the participant to select the best image based on instruction following & identity preservation (IF&IP), and perceptual quality (PQ), respec-

Table 5. Evaluations on sim-to-real generalization. Additional baselines are provided in Table A9. 

Complex-Edit Editing Paradigm IF ↑ IP ↑ PQ ↑

Zero-Shot Single-Turn Editing 7.88 5.22 5.96 2-Step Seq. Editing 7.18 4.62 5.46 R Single-Turn Editing 8.20 6.00 7.77 

2-Step Seq. Editing 7.72 5.59 7.12 S Single-Turn Editing 7.14 5.79 5.77 CGSE ( K = 2 , γ ctx = 0 .5) 7.18 5.92 5.75 SR Single-Turn Editing 8.23 6.26 6.99 FCSE ( K = 2 ) 8.13 5.94 6.65 CGSE ( K = 2 , γ ctx = 0 .5) 8.25 6.38 6.96 CGSE ( K = 2 , γ ctx = 0 .7) 8.22 6.36 6.88 CGSE ( K = 3 , γ ctx = 0 .5) 8.10 6.35 6.86 

tively, along with the best compromise (Overall). In Fig-ure 5, we observe that user preference positively correlates with VLM-based evaluation results. Furthermore, although SR (CGSE) is slightly (4.6%) less preferable than R on PQ, it remains the top-performing approach for both IF&IP and Overall as recognized by human evaluators. Nonetheless, we find that full-context sequential editing does not generalize well to real editing tasks and even un-derperforms single-turn editing, likely due to its reliance on high-quality contextual information from real images. Un-like in the synthetic domain, naively increasing decomposi-tion steps does not yield clear performance gains. Finally, finetuning on synthetic data may impair the perceptual qual-ity of generated images. While our work primarily focuses on improving semantic consistency between editing pro-cesses and the instruction, enhancing the perceptual quality of the sequentially edited images is left for future work. 

6. Conclusion 

In this work, we investigate how to robustly improve com-plex image editing tasks via sequential decomposition. The central challenge lies in balancing the benefits of multi-step decomposition with the error accumulation introduced by sequential execution. We examine sequential decomposi-tion within an in-context editing framework and develop a synthetic data pipeline that constructs editing tasks of varying instruction complexity. We observe that finetuning models on the curated editing sequences enables sequen-tial decomposition to consistently improve the execution of complex editing instructions, with the strongest gains ob-served on tasks involving inter-step dependencies. Particu-larly, context-guided sequential editing demonstrates robust performance across diverse evaluation settings and outper-forms other editing paradigms. Finally, we discover that the decomposition skills learned from synthetic tasks can be further transferred to complex real-world editing scenar-ios by co-training with real single-turn editing data. 8Acknowledgement 

We would like to thank Bo Liu, Qi Zhao, Yuwei Guo, Calvin Luo, and Nate Gillman for their helpful discussion. 

References 

[1] Stephen Batifol, Andreas Blattmann, Frederic Boesel, Saksham Consul, Cyril Diagne, Tim Dockhorn, Jack English, Zion English, Patrick Esser, Sumith Kulal, et al. Flux. 1 kontext: Flow matching for in-context image generation and editing in latent space. arXiv e-prints , pages arXiv–2506, 2025. 2, 3 [2] James Betker, Gabriel Goh, Li Jing, † TimBrooks, Jianfeng Wang, Linjie Li, † LongOuyang, † Jun-tangZhuang, † JoyceLee, † YufeiGuo, † Wesam-Manassra, † PrafullaDhariwal, † CaseyChu, † Yunx-inJiao, and Aditya Ramesh. Improving image genera-tion with better captions. 1 [3] Tim Brooks, Aleksander Holynski, and Alexei A. Efros. Instructpix2pix: Learning to follow image edit-ing instructions. 2023 IEEE/CVF Conference on Com-puter Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR) , pages 18392–18402, 2022. 1, 2, 6 [4] Mingdeng Cao, Xintao Wang, Zhongang Qi, Ying Shan, Xiaohu Qie, and Yinqiang Zheng. Masactrl: Tuning-free mutual self-attention control for consis-tent image synthesis and editing. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF international conference on computer vision , pages 22560–22570, 2023. 6 [5] Mingdeng Cao, Xuaner Zhang, Yinqiang Zheng, and Zhihao Xia. Instruction-based image manipulation by watching how things move. In Proceedings of the Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition Conference ,pages 2704–2713, 2025. 6 [6] Di Chang, Mingdeng Cao, Yichun Shi, Bo Liu, Shengqu Cai, Shijie Zhou, Weilin Huang, Gor-don Wetzstein, Mohammad Soleymani, and Peng Wang. Bytemorph: Benchmarking instruction-guided image editing with non-rigid motions. ArXiv ,abs/2506.03107, 2025. 6 [7] Xi Chen, Lianghua Huang, Yu Liu, Yujun Shen, Deli Zhao, and Hengshuang Zhao. Anydoor: Zero-shot object-level image customization. 2024 IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recog-nition (CVPR) , pages 6593–6602, 2023. 6 [8] Xi Chen, Zhifei Zhang, He Zhang, Yuqian Zhou, Soo Ye Kim, Qing Liu, Yijun Li, Jianming Zhang, Nanxuan Zhao, Yilin Wang, et al. Unireal: Universal image generation and editing via learning real-world dynamics. In Proceedings of the Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition Conference , pages 12501–12511, 2025. 2 [9] Guillaume Couairon, Jakob Verbeek, Holger Schwenk, and Matthieu Cord. Diffedit: Diffusion-based semantic image editing with mask guidance. 

arXiv preprint arXiv:2210.11427 , 2022. 6 [10] Chaorui Deng, Deyao Zhu, Kunchang Li, Chenhui Gou, Feng Li, Zeyu Wang, Shu Zhong, Weihao Yu, Xiaonan Nie, Ziang Song, et al. Emerging proper-ties in unified multimodal pretraining. arXiv preprint arXiv:2505.14683 , 2025. 2, 5, 6, 4 [11] Maximilian Denninger, Dominik Winkelbauer, Mar-tin Sundermeyer, Wout Boerdijk, Markus Knauer, Klaus H. Strobl, Matthias Humt, and Rudolph Triebel. Blenderproc2: A procedural pipeline for photorealis-tic rendering. Journal of Open Source Software , 8(82): 4901, 2023. 1 [12] Zhao Dong, Ka Chen, Zhaoyang Lv, Hong-Xing Yu, Yunzhi Zhang, Cheng Zhang, Yufeng Zhu, Stephen Tian, Zhengqin Li, Geordie Moffatt, Sean Christof-ferson, James Fort, Xiaqing Pan, Mingfei Yan, Jiajun Wu, Carl Yuheng Ren, and Richard Newcombe. Digi-tal twin catalog: A large-scale photorealistic 3d object digital twin dataset. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recogni-tion (CVPR) , 2025. 5 [13] Patrick Esser, Sumith Kulal, Andreas Blattmann, Rahim Entezari, Jonas M¨ uller, Harry Saini, Yam Levi, Dominik Lorenz, Axel Sauer, Frederic Boesel, Dustin Podell, Tim Dockhorn, Zion English, and Robin Rom-bach. Scaling rectified flow transformers for high-resolution image synthesis. In Proceedings of the 41st International Conference on Machine Learning , pages 12606–12633. PMLR, 2024. 1 [14] Tsu-Jui Fu, Wenze Hu, Xianzhi Du, William Yang Wang, Yinfei Yang, and Zhe Gan. Guiding instruction-based image editing via multimodal large language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2309.17102 ,2023. 6 [15] Poly Haven. https://polyhaven.com/ . 5 [16] Amir Hertz, Ron Mokady, Jay Tenenbaum, Kfir Aber-man, Yael Pritch, and Daniel Cohen-Or. Prompt-to-prompt image editing with cross attention control. 

arXiv preprint arXiv:2208.01626 , 2022. 6 [17] Yuzhou Huang, Liangbin Xie, Xintao Wang, Ziyang Yuan, Xiaodong Cun, Yixiao Ge, Jiantao Zhou, Chao Dong, Rui Huang, Ruimao Zhang, et al. Smartedit: Exploring complex instruction-based image editing with multimodal large language models. In Proceed-ings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition , pages 8362–8371, 2024. 6 [18] Bahjat Kawar, Shiran Zada, Oran Lang, Omer Tov, Huiwen Chang, Tali Dekel, Inbar Mosseri, and Michal Irani. Imagic: Text-based real image editing with dif-fusion models. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF con-

9ference on computer vision and pattern recognition ,pages 6007–6017, 2023. 6 [19] Ang Li, Charles L. Wang, Kaiyu Yue, Zikui Cai, Ol-lie Liu, Deqing Fu, Peng Guo, Wang Bill Zhu, Vatsal Sharan, Robin Jia, Willie Neiswanger, Furong Huang, Tom Goldstein, and Micah Goldblum. Zebra-cot: A dataset for interleaved vision language reasoning. 

ArXiv , abs/2507.16746, 2025. 4 [20] Chenlin Meng, Yang Song, Jiaming Song, Jiajun Wu, Jun-Yan Zhu, and Stefano Ermon. Sdedit: Image syn-thesis and editing with stochastic differential equa-tions. arXiv preprint arXiv:2108.01073 , 2021. 6 [21] Alexander Quinn Nichol, Prafulla Dhariwal, Aditya Ramesh, Pranav Shyam, Pamela Mishkin, Bob Mc-grew, Ilya Sutskever, and Mark Chen. GLIDE: To-wards photorealistic image generation and editing with text-guided diffusion models. In Proceedings of the 39th International Conference on Machine Learn-ing , pages 16784–16804. PMLR, 2022. 1 [22] OpenAI. Addendum to gpt-4o system card: Native image generation. OpenAI, 2025. 2, 3, 6, 4 [23] Yusu Qian, Eli Bocek-Rivele, Liangchen Song, Jial-ing Tong, Yinfei Yang, Jiasen Lu, Wenze Hu, and Zhe Gan. Pico-banana-400k: A large-scale dataset for text-guided image editing, 2025. 6 [24] Leigang Qu, Feng Cheng, Ziyan Yang, Qi Zhao, Shanchuan Lin, Yichun Shi, Yicong Li, Wenjie Wang, Tat-Seng Chua, and Lu Jiang. Vincie: Unlock-ing in-context image editing from video. ArXiv ,abs/2506.10941, 2025. 2 [25] Aditya Ramesh, Mikhail Pavlov, Gabriel Goh, Scott Gray, Chelsea Voss, Alec Radford, Mark Chen, and Ilya Sutskever. Zero-shot text-to-image generation. In 

Proceedings of the 38th International Conference on Machine Learning , pages 8821–8831. PMLR, 2021. 1[26] Aditya Ramesh, Prafulla Dhariwal, Alex Nichol, Casey Chu, and Mark Chen. Hierarchical text-conditional image generation with clip latents. ArXiv ,abs/2204.06125, 2022. 1 [27] Robin Rombach, A. Blattmann, Dominik Lorenz, Patrick Esser, and Bj¨ orn Ommer. High-resolution image synthesis with latent diffusion models. 2022 IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pat-tern Recognition (CVPR) , pages 10674–10685, 2021. 6[28] Chitwan Saharia, William Chan, Saurabh Saxena, Lala Li, Jay Whang, Emily L. Denton, Seyed Kamyar Seyed Ghasemipour, Burcu Karagol Ayan, Seyedeh Sara Mahdavi, Raphael Gontijo Lopes, Tim Salimans, Jonathan Ho, David J. Fleet, and Moham-mad Norouzi. Photorealistic text-to-image diffusion models with deep language understanding. ArXiv ,abs/2205.11487, 2022. 1 [29] Shelly Sheynin, Adam Polyak, Uriel Singer, Yuval Kirstain, Amit Zohar, Oron Ashual, Devi Parikh, and Yaniv Taigman. Emu edit: Precise image editing via recognition and generation tasks. 2024 IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recog-nition (CVPR) , pages 8871–8879, 2023. 2 [30] Shelly Sheynin, Adam Polyak, Uriel Singer, Yuval Kirstain, Amit Zohar, Oron Ashual, Devi Parikh, and Yaniv Taigman. Emu edit: Precise image editing via recognition and generation tasks. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition , pages 8871–8879, 2024. 6 [31] Oriane Sim’eoni, Huy V. Vo, Maximilian Seitzer, Fed-erico Baldassarre, Maxime Oquab, Cijo Jose, Vasil Khalidov, Marc Szafraniec, Seungeun Yi, Michael Ra-mamonjisoa, Francisco Massa, Daniel Haziza, Luca Wehrstedt, Jianyuan Wang, Timoth´ ee Darcet, Th´ eo Moutakanni, Leonel Sentana, Claire Roberts, Andrea Vedaldi, Jamie Tolan, John Brandt, Camille Couprie, Julien Mairal, Herv’e J’egou, Patrick Labatut, and Pi-otr Bojanowski. Dinov3. 2025. 6 [32] Quan Sun, Yufeng Cui, Xiaosong Zhang, Fan Zhang, Qiying Yu, Yueze Wang, Yongming Rao, Jingjing Liu, Tiejun Huang, and Xinlong Wang. Generative multi-modal models are in-context learners. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition , pages 14398–14409, 2024. 2 [33] Google Gemini Team. Gemini 2.5 flash image (nano banana). https : / / gemini . google . com/ ,2025. 2, 3, 6, 4 [34] CC0 Textures. https://cc0-textures.com/ .5[35] Narek Tumanyan, Michal Geyer, Shai Bagon, and Tali Dekel. Plug-and-play diffusion features for text-driven image-to-image translation. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF conference on computer vision and pattern recognition , pages 1921–1930, 2023. 6 [36] Cong Wei, Zheyang Xiong, Weiming Ren, Xinrun Du, Ge Zhang, and Wenhu Chen. Omniedit: Building im-age editing generalist models through specialist super-vision. ArXiv , abs/2411.07199, 2024. 1 [37] Chenfei Wu, Jiahao Li, Jingren Zhou, Junyang Lin, Kaiyuan Gao, Kun Yan, Sheng ming Yin, Shuai Bai, Xiao Xu, Yilei Chen, Yuxiang Chen, Zecheng Tang, Zekai Zhang, Zhengyi Wang, An Yang, Bowen Yu, Chen Cheng, Dayiheng Liu, Deqing Li, Hang Zhang, Hao Meng, Hu Wei, Jingyuan Ni, Kai Chen, Kuan Cao, Liang Peng, Lin Qu, Minggang Wu, Peng Wang, Shuting Yu, Tingkun Wen, Wensen Feng, Xiaoxiao Xu, Yi Wang, Yichang Zhang, Yongqiang Zhu, Yujia 10 Wu, Yuxuan Cai, and Zenan Liu. Qwen-image techni-cal report, 2025. 3, 4 [38] Chenfei Wu, Jiahao Li, Jingren Zhou, Junyang Lin, Kaiyuan Gao, Kun Yan, Sheng ming Yin, Shuai Bai, Xiao Xu, Yilei Chen, Yuxiang Chen, Zecheng Tang, Zekai Zhang, Zhengyi Wang, An Yang, Bowen Yu, Chen Cheng, Da-Wei Liu, De mei Li, Hang Zhang, Hao Meng, Hu Wei, Ji-Li Ni, Kai Chen, Kuan Cao, Liang Peng, Lin Qu, Min Wu, Peng Wang, Shuting Yu, Tingkun Wen, Wensen Feng, Xiao-Xue Xu, Yi Wang, Yichang Zhang, Yong-An Zhu, Yujia Wu, Yu-Jiao Cai, and Ze-Yang Liu. Qwen-image technical re-port. ArXiv , abs/2508.02324, 2025. 6 [39] Shitao Xiao, Yueze Wang, Junjie Zhou, Huaying Yuan, Xingrun Xing, Ruiran Yan, Chaofan Li, Shut-ing Wang, Tiejun Huang, and Zheng Liu. Omni-gen: Unified image generation. In Proceedings of the Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition Conference ,pages 13294–13304, 2025. 2 [40] Siwei Yang, Mude Hui, Bingchen Zhao, Yuyin Zhou, Nataniel Ruiz, and Cihang Xie. Complex-edit: Cot-like instruction generation for complexity-controllable image editing benchmark. ArXiv , abs/2504.13143, 2025. 2, 3, 6, 7 [41] Qifan Yu, Wei Chow, Zhongqi Yue, Kaihang Pan, Yang Wu, Xiaoyang Wan, Juncheng Li, Siliang Tang, Hanwang Zhang, and Yueting Zhuang. Anyedit: Mas-tering unified high-quality image editing for any idea. 

arXiv preprint arXiv:2411.15738 , 2024. 6 [42] Kai Zhang, Lingbo Mo, Wenhu Chen, Huan Sun, and Yu Su. Magicbrush: A manually annotated dataset for instruction-guided image editing. ArXiv ,abs/2306.10012, 2023. 2, 6 [43] Haozhe Zhao, Xiaojian Ma, Liang Chen, Shuzheng Si, Rujie Wu, Kaikai An, Peiyu Yu, Minjia Zhang, Qing Li, and Baobao Chang. Ultraedit: Instruction-based fine-grained image editing at scale. ArXiv ,abs/2407.05282, 2024. 1, 2, 6 [44] Zijun Zhou, Yingying Deng, Xiangyu He, Weiming Dong, and Fan Tang. Multi-turn consistent image edit-ing. ArXiv , abs/2505.04320, 2025. 2 11 Towards Robust Sequential Decomposition for Complex Image Editing 

# Supplementary Material 

A. Synthetic Data Generation 

A.1. Scene Initialization 

We implement our synthetic data generation pipeline on top of BlenderProc [11], a Blender-based pipeline for photore-alistic image rendering. To create a photorealistic 3D scene, we first construct an empty rectangular room of size 8x8x3, in which we create fundamental structural planes, including a floor, a ceiling, and four walls. These structural planes are placed in a coordinate system with the floor at z = 0 and walls aligned to the room boundaries. Additionally, a light plane (embedded in the ceiling) is added to ensure basic il-lumination. Then we randomly sample textures from CC0 Textures for the floor and walls. After the base empty room is constructed, we start to populate it with movable objects selected from an asset cat-alog, which is compiled beforehand to list available objects with their metadata, including semantic labels, categories, and estimated sizes. To ensure every scene has at least one object that can serve as a supporter to other objects, we first sample an object from predefined supporter categories ( e.g ., tables, desks), and place the object at the center of the room. Before we sample other room objects, we first compute a safe object size range based on the room dimensions, object count, and camera field of view to prevent choosing objects that are too large to fit comfortably in the scene, with which we can filter objects according to their estimated sizes from the catalog. We then sample N = 9 unique objects in a single batch from the catalog, and place them sequen-tially into a constrained area where the camera can easily obtain good visibility on all objects. During this process, each placement finds a collision-free position for the object on the floor using collision checkers from BlenderProc. If no collision-free positions can be found for the objects, we skip the placement of the current object and move on to the next one. When the whole batch of selected objects are pro-cessed, we run physics simulation for all objects simultane-ously to improve scene realism. Once the scene are popu-lated with objects, we sample a camera pose that provides a good coverage of scene content, ensuring the spawned ob-jects are adequately visible and well-framed in the rendered image. By default, we render every scene into a 512 × 512 

image with 256 samples for each pixel. Furthermore, we record the metadata ( e.g ., object labels, categories, poses, sizes, etc.), and the spatial relationships between objects into a registry for all loaded objects in the scene, providing a clearly documented initial state where the subsequent editing process can operate on. 

A.2. Editing Operation Design 

To enable complex edits in our pipeline, we predefined 10 editing operations in total, each associated with a set of pa-rameters. Each operation either performs an edit on a single object in the scene, changes the camera position, or changes the scene background. We outline the predefined editing op-erations in detail below: 

Object Addition introduces a new object of a novel cate-gory under a specified size constraint into the scene to en-courage diversity. We support two modes for regular object addition: adding an object on top of a supporter object or near another object on the floor. Additionally, to enable po-sition reference dependency, we allow the operation to di-rectly take in a 3D coordinate of the initial location of an object that has been moved. When adding the object, we also run collision and visibility checking to maintain the vi-sual quality of the rendered image. 

Object Removal deletes an object from the scene. How-ever, we do not allow the structural planes ( e.g ., floors and walls) or objects that are supporting other objects to be re-moved. 

Object Translation repositions a non-supporter object while maintaining collision-free placement and cam-era visibility. We support three regular translation modes, allowing the target object to move by direction (left/right/forward/backward), near a reference object with a distance constraint, or onto another object. Similarly, we allow the operation to take in 3D coordinates directly for position reference. 

Object Rotation rotates the object around its vertical axis, with a degree sampled from predefined candidates (60°, 90°, 120°, 180°) and a direction sampled from “clockwise” or “counter-clockwise”. 

Object Replacement replaces an existing object with a dif-ferent one sampled from the catalog. The newly placed ob-ject inherits the xy location of the original objects. We also run collision checks for the new object and perform slight adjustments if collisions occur. 

Color Change replace the color of an existing object with new one selected from a predefined palette of 12 colors, which includes “red”, “blue”, “green”, “yellow”, “orange”, “purple”, “pink”, “white”, “black”, “gray”, “brown”, and “beige”. 

Material Change replace the material of an existing object with a new one chosen from a predefined set of 5 mate-rials, which includes “wood”, “metal”, “plastic”, “fabric”, and “glass”. 1Figure A1. Visualizations of constructed editing sequence samples 5 10 15         

> AVG: 9.98
> 0
> 10
> 20
> Percentage (%)
> Editing Chain Length
> 0.00 0.25 0.50 0.75
> AVG: 0.29
> 0
> 20
> 40
> Dependency Ratio
> 0510 15
> AVG: 9.19
> 0
> 20
> 40
> 60
> Unique Object Count scale
> 7%
> rotate
> 8%
> move 18%
> change material
> 10%
> remove
> 5%
> add
> 14%
> change color
> 10%
> replace
> 15%
> change background
> 5%
> change viewpoint
> 7%
> Editing Operation

Figure A2. Statistical analysis of synthetic editing sequences 

Size Change applies uniform size transformations to an ex-isting object with a scale sampled from predefined candi-dates (0.6, 0.8, 1.2, 1.5, 1.8) with collision checks. 

Viewpoint Change includes four types of camera pose transformation: (1) translation (0.4m forward or backward); (2) panning (0.4m left or right); (3) tilting (5° up or down); (4) yawing (5° left or right). Meanwhile, the visibility of all objects should remain the same after the camera pose transformation. 

Background Change modifies the visual appearances of structural surfaces ( e.g ., floors and walls) by replacing their textures with a new material sampled from CC0 Textures. Every background change operation can either change the texture of the floor or both the floor and the walls. 

Dependency Injection. We maintain a detailed log of all executed editing operations when constructing editing chains. This log records each operation’s type, sampled pa-rameters, and the resulting changes to object states ( e.g ., updated 3D coordinates). Our dependency injector builds directly on this editing history. For every newly sampled op-eration (excluding viewpoint and background changes), we decide whether to inject one of two inter-step dependencies, operation reference or position reference, with probability 

pd = 0 .5. Concretely, the task construction begins with only operation-reference injection enabled: for every oper-ation after the first, there is a 50% chance that its instruction will be augmented with reference-based object descriptions. Once an object has been removed or repositioned, position-reference injection becomes available, and both dependency types are then sampled with equal probability (25% each). 

A.3. Instruction Generation 

We use a library of hand-crafted templates to generate nat-ural language instructions for editing operations. Each tem-plate contains placeholders that get filled with operation-specific parameters like object names, colors, directions, and action verbs. Action verbs are randomized to prevent repetitive language. For example, object addition can use 2Table A1. GPT-5 prompts for two-step evaluation 

System Prompt You are an expert evaluator for image editing. You will first be provided with a complex editing instruction and the source image to be edited, please analyze the complex task by rigorously tracking the editing transitions, and list all modifications that need to be reflected in the final edited image. Then you will be given an edited image for evaluation. You will need to examine carefully if the edited image accurately reflects all the required changes according to your reasoning. A successful edit should not have any extra changes that are not required by the instruction. The edited image should have minimal changes to reflect the modifications from the instruction. You need to provide a final rating for the editing result from 0 to 10, with 10 being the perfect edit that precisely reflects all changes while preserving everything else. Conclude your evaluation with the score wrapped with <s>. . . </s >.Step-1 Prompt Please analyze the modifications that should be reflected in the final image by strictly reasoning over the editing trace, given the source image and the complex instruction. Modifications in-clude but are not limited to object placement, object removal, object modification, background change, and camera movement. Step-1 Input Source Image Isrc , Complex Instruction Tc

Step-2 Prompt Please evaluate whether the edited image accurately reflects the modifications specified in the complex editing instruction based on your previous reasoning. Be critical of the changes made during the editing process. Conclude your assessment with a final score wrapped with 

<s>. . . <\s>.Step-2 Input Generated editing result Igen 

Output Example ... <s>5.0 </s >

”Add”, ”Place”, or ”Put” as the opening verb, object trans-lation alternates between ”Move” and ”Relocate”, and color changes use ”Recolor” or ”Paint”. This randomization en-ables natural variations that improve instruction diversity. For inter-step dependency, (1) operation reference connects the current edit to a recently manipulated object using tem-poral descriptions like ”the object that was moved” or ”the object that was recolored”, which anonymizes the object identity, using only ”object” or ”the object” to force models to track which object was affected by the referenced opera-tion. When multiple objects share the same history opera-tions ( e.g ., more than one objects were moved), we enrich the referenced action verb with attribute details to ensure the reference unambiguously identifies the intended target. For instance, if both a chair and a book were moved by prior edits, referring to ”the object that was moved” would be ambiguous, so the instruction will be further enriched with ”the object that was moved onto the desk” to distinguish between them. (2) Position reference encodes spatial mem-ory by referring to locations where objects were originally placed. These instructions use temporal markers to clarify the reference point: ”Move the lamp to where the vase orig-inally was” or ”Add a book where the cup initially was”. 

A.4. Heuristic Filters for Data Generation 

To avoid untraceable transitions that trivialize the task in single-turn settings, we heuristically filter out operation se-quences whose later steps depend on transient intermediate states that can not be inferred without step-by-step visual-ization. For instance, a sequence that adds an object and subsequently rotates it is excluded, since the rotation relies on the object’s intermediate orientation introduced by the addition operation, which is not observable in the single-turn setting. Plus, we only allow position reference to point to the original position from scene initialization rather than intermediate positions during editing. This design ensures position references have clear, unambiguous targets. Meanwhile, we do not explicitly exclude trajectories in which a later editing operation overwrites an earlier one, as such interactions naturally arise in complex editing tasks and contribute to instruction complexity from different an-gles. Moreover, correctly resolving these dependencies is itself a non-trivial challenge for achieving high-fidelity ed-its. We also avoid any explicit prompt rewriting that could dilute or simplify the constructed instruction complexity in our experiments. This choice allows us to directly stress-test existing models’ editing capabilities using the full, un-altered complex instructions. 3Table A2. Classifier-Free Guidance Implementation Comparisons                                                                                                                         

> CFG IMG CFG TEXT ST INPUT CTX INPUT Guidance Computation INPUT: ⟨I0,ˆTc⟩
> Single-Turn Editing ˆTcI0
> vtext =vθ(cfg text ) + γtext
>  vθ(input )−vθ(cfg text )
> v=vθ(cfg img ) + γimg
>  vtext −vθ(cfg img )
> INPUT: ⟨I0, T 1, I 1, . . . , T i⟩
> Default {Tj}ij=1 I0,{(Tj, I j)}i−1
> j=1
> vtext =vθ(cfg text ) + γtext
>  vθ(input )−vθ(cfg text )
> v=vθ(cfg img ) + γimg
>  vtext −vθ(cfg img )
> Separate {Tj}ij=1 {Ij}i−1
> j=0
> vtext =vθ(cfg text ) + γtext
>  vθ(input )−vθ(cfg text )
> v=vθ(cfg img ) + γimg
>  vtext −vθ(cfg img )
> Full-Context I0,{(Tj, I j)}i−2
> k=1 ,{Tk}ik=i−1I0,{(Tj, I j)}i−1
> k=1
> vtext =vθ(cfg text ) + γtext
>  vθ(input )−vθ(cfg text )
> v=vθ(cfg img ) + γimg
>  vtext −vθ(cfg img )
> Context-Guided {Tj}ij=1 I0I0,{Tj}ij=1
> I0,{Tj}ij=1 ,
> Ii−1or other context composition
> vtext =vθ(cfg text ) + γtext
>  vθ(st input )−vθ(cfg text )
> vd=vθ(cfg img ) + γimg
>  vtext −vθ(cfg img )
> v=vd+γctx
>  vθ(ctx input) −vθ(st input )

A.5. Dataset Analysis 

We construct a synthetic dataset including 60K indepen-dent chains and 34K dependent chains through our pipeline. Samples of constructed editing sequences are illustrated in Figure A1. In Figure A2, we provide a statistical analy-sis over the dataset from the following four aspects: (1) Editing Chain Length: The constructed editing chains have an average length of 9.98, skewed slightly towards longer sequences; (2) Dependency Ratio: Among all the editing chains with inter-step dependencies, we have dependency ratios concentrated in the range of (0, 0.55], with an av-erage ratio of 0.29; (3) Unique Object Count: Each scene have 9.19 unique objects on average, which are drawn from 2,000+ 3D assets, offering sufficient scene complexity for editing chain construction; (4) Distribution of Editing Op-erations: 10 different operations are distributed in balance, mildly favoring object translation and replacement. 

B. Experimental Details 

Baselines. In synthetic experiments, we compare our ap-proach against four state-of-the-art editing models as base-lines: Qwen-Image [37], GPT-4o [22], Gemini 2.5 Flash Image [33] and BAGEL (Zero-Shot) [10]. All four base-lines are evaluated in a zero-shot manner. To evaluate their sequential editing performance, we implement Gemini 2.5 Flash Image and BAGEL (Zero-Shot) as in-context editing, where all subsequent edits attend to all previous contex-tual inputs, and GPT-4o as canonical multi-turn editing, in which every edit is performed on the result from the last editing session without access to the historical context. 

Implementation details. Our framework is built on top of BAGEL [10], which naively supports the training of in-terleaved generation. Specifically, we adapted the imple-mentation from [19] for instruction decomposition and in-context editing training tasks. We set max num tokens to 55000 to cover more complex tasks with longer interleaved sequences, and increased the dropout rate for different to-kens to {text: 0.15, VAE: 0.4, ViT: 0.4 }. For other hy-

Table A3. Evaluations on different sequential editing paradigms 

Sequential Editing Independent Dependent Default (K=3) 4.06 4.07 Default (K=5) 4.18 4.13 

Separate (K=3) 4.11 4.12 Separate (K=5) 4.19 4.05 Full-Context (K=3) 4.14 4.06 Full-Context (K=5) 4.16 4.13 

Context-Guided (K=3) 4.15 4.04 Context-Guided (K=5) 4.20 4.14 

perparameters, we reuse the configurations provided by the authors and finetune the model for 12,000 steps in syn-thetic experiments and 1,000 steps in sim-to-real experi-ments, with a learning rate of 2e-5. All experiments are performed on 8 H100 GPUs. In Complex-Edit evaluation, we employ direct concatenation, rather than using GPT-4o, to compound 8 atomic instructions in each task. 

Metrics. For DINOv3-based similarity metrics, we com-pute (1) DINO-I: the cosine similarity between the DINO features of the generated image and its reference target image as cos (C(Igen ), C(Itgt )) ; (2) DINO-D: the co-sine similarity over editing directions as cos (C(Igen ) −

C(Isrc ), C(Itgt ) − C(Isrc )) , where C denotes DINOv3 encoder, and Isrc , I tgt , I gen denote the source image, the target image and the generated image respectively. For GPT-5–based evaluation, we adopt a two-step procedure: (a) GPT-5 first infers the desired modifications by jointly analyzing the source image and the complex instruction, (b) we then provide GPT-5 with the generated editing result to assess how well it satisfies those inferred requirements. The prompts we applied are shown in Table A1. 

C. More Experiments and Ablation Studies 

Classifier-Free Guidance. In our framework, different ways of computing classifier-free guidance encompass ver-satile editing paradigms. We instantiate our framework 4with BAGEL [10], in which the authors provide one way to compute classifier-free guidance that is slightly different from what we used in full-context sequential editing and context-guided sequential editing. In the following, we term the editing paradigm induced by the default CFG computa-tion from BAGEL as “default sequential editing”. Specifi-cally, the sequential editing performances of BAGEL (Zero-Shot) in Table 1 and Table 2, BAGEL-Zero-Shot (2-Step Sequential Editing), as well as BAGEL-R (2-Step Sequen-tial Editing) in Table 5, are evaluated with default sequen-tial editing paradigm. We provide a detailed comparison between default, full-context, context-guided paradigms, along with another editing paradigm which separately com-pute the guidance from text-only and image-only sequences (termed ”separate”) in Table A2, following the notations from BAGEL’s implementation. The default, separate and full-context sequential editing paradigms utilize all contex-tual inputs to generate the next editing result with differ-ent context focuses, whereas context-guided editing selec-tively use previous editing results as an additional signal to guide single-turn editing. Furthermore, we report the eval-uation results on both independent and dependent chains for all four sequential editing paradigms with our finetuned BAGEL in Table A3. We discover that all sequential edit-ing paradigms achieves better performance than single-turn editing after finetuning, highlighting the effectiveness of se-quential decomposition and robustness of our framework. Also, the default and full-context editing paradigms gener-ally have similar performances on the challenging depen-dent setting, where the separate editing paradigm encoun-ters a decline when the number of decomposition steps in-creases. Context-guided editing overall can be considered as a robust paradigm for sequential decomposition. 

Effect of γctx . By default, we use γctx = 2 .5 for synthetic editing tasks and γctx = 0 .5 for real-world editing tasks. We also test context-guided sequential editing ( K = 3 ) with different values of γctx on 100 unseen independent and de-pendent chains, and provide the results in Table A4. We found γctx = 2 .5 achieves the best overall performance among the evaluated settings.    

> Table A4. Ablation on γctx for Context-Guided Editing (K=3)

γctx (K = 3) 0.5 1.5 2.5 3.5 Independent Chains (100) 4.41 4.24 4.35 4.30 Dependent Chains (100) 3.96 4.10 4.23 3.87 

Effect of context composition. By default, we use the last editing result alone as the guidance for guidance computa-tion in context-guided editing. We also compare different context compositions on 100 independent and dependent chains, and provide the results in Table A5. We observe that using all previous editing results can lead to a performance drop. We hypothesize that the errors in all previous editing results can cumulatively impact the current edits, leading to compounding errors and performance degradation.          

> Table A5. Ablation on context composition for Step i
> Context Composition (K=3, γctx = 2 .5)All Previous Editing Results
> {Ij}ij=0
> Last Editing Result
> Ij−1
> Independent Chains (100) 4.18 4.35
> Dependent Chains (100) 4.13 4.23

Ablation on decomposition steps. We study how the number of decomposition steps impacts the performance of context-guided sequential editing and provide the results in Table A6. We observe that more decomposition steps yield performance gains. Specifically, K = 4 performs the best on independent chains, while K = 5 achieves the highest performance on editing tasks with inter-step dependencies.                   

> Table A6. Ablation on decomposition steps (K) for Context-Guided Sequential Editing with γctx = 2 .5
> KSingle-Turn (1) 2345Independent Chains 4.0 4.06 4.15 4.27 4.20 Dependent Chains 3.91 4.11 4.04 4.11 4.14

Editing sequences versus pairwise transitions as train-ing data. We also investigate how the training data formu-lation affects the sequential editing performance. To enable sequential editing, we can either train our model on editing sequences with objectives described in 4, or break each edit-ing sequence down into individual editing pairs and opti-mize the model to perform single-turn editing on these pair-wise transition data. We train BAGEL on these two types of data with their corresponding objectives respectively, and compare their sequential editing performance on indepen-dent chains with three decomposition steps. Table A7 shows that even though the model is trained on data that teaches the model how to perform the visual transitions individually, it remains difficult to perform sequential editing robustly due to the train-test gap. On the other hand, training on editing sequences naturally encourages the model to perform se-quential editing by utilizing the rich contextual inputs, lead-ing to better performance.  

> Table A7. Comparison between sequential and pairwise train-ing data for sequential editing inference

# Editing Operations in Tasks 3 >3Pairwise Transitions 2.94 2.30 Editing Sequences 5.03 4.04 

Ablation on single-turn editing training objective. We investigate whether incorporating a single-turn editing ob-jective during training affects the performance of context-guided editing. In Table A8, we compare context-guided 5editing results using three decomposition steps ( i.e . K = 3 )on independent chains, with and without the single-turn editing objective enabled. We find that the instruction de-composition and in-context editing objectives alone already yield robust improvements through context-guided sequen-tial editing, while adding the single-turn editing objective provides a further performance boost.      

> Table A8. Impact of single-turn editing training objective on context-guided sequential editing
> Training Objective w/o Single-Turn Editing w/ Single-Turn Editing Context-Guided Editing 4.12 4.15

Additional Baselines on Complex-Edit. In Table A9, we re-run AnyEdit [41] and UltraEdit [43] with instructions composed by concatenating 8 atomic editing operations.                    

> Table A9. Additional baselines on Complex-Edit
> Complex-Edit IF ↑IP ↑PQ ↑
> AnyEdit (Single-Turn) 1.68 8.49 7.37 AnyEdit (2-Step Sequential Editing) 2.61 7.43 6.63 UltraEdit (Single-Turn) 6.00 5.49 7.19 UltraEdit (2-Step Sequential Editing) 5.78 5.01 7.38

Inference Cost. In Table A10, we analyze inference cost on a single A100 GPU with K={1,3,5 } and 50 denoising steps per image. We find that fully generating K>1 images with CGSE takes approximately 0.85 K times the cost of single-turn editing ( K=1)—a 15% speedup enabled by KV cache. However, this cost can be further reduced on more advanced GPUs ( e.g . H200) and with faster sampling after distillation.              

> Table A10. Inference cost analysis
> Decomposed Steps ( K)135Inference Time Per Task (s) 43.2 ±1.5 112.1 ±1.6 182.0 ±1.4

D. More Related Work 

Instruction-based Image Editing. As opposed to prior works [4, 9, 16, 18, 20, 35] that rely on detailed textual de-scriptions of the desired image to guide the editing process, “instructions” specify how the image should be changed, providing a user-friendly interface for image editing. Fu-eled by advancements in model architectures and multi-modal datasets for image synthesis, instruction-based im-age editing has achieved rapid progress over recent years. InstructPix2Pix [3] pioneered the use of instructions for image editing by finetuning Stable Diffusion [27] on syn-thetic data [16], and inspired a line of following works in which editing models are further improved to perform diversified types of edits on both real and synthetic im-ages [5, 14, 17, 30, 42, 43]. 

E. More Qualitative Results 

• We provide a full five-step illustration of the context-guided sequential editing on a dependent chain with 13 editing operations in Figure A3. Context-guided sequen-tial editing modifies the scene following the per-step in-struction, leading to high-accuracy edits with merely one incomplete modification ( i.e ., rotated the tissue box for 180° but did not continue the rotation for 90° counter-clockwise), which is labeled by the yellow box. • We compare context-guided sequential editing with full-context sequential editing on an independent chain (Fig-ure A4) and a dependent chain (Figure A5) when decom-posing the complex instruction into 5 steps. We observe that context-guided sequential editing robustly produces correct edits, whereas full-context sequential editing of-ten leads to undesired modifications. • In Figure A6 and Figure A7, we compare our methods against baselines on two independent chains with 6 and 5 editing operations, respectively. Particularly, we observe that in Figure A6, even though context-guided sequen-tial editing fails to replace the trivet with a cocoa bean in the first edit, it can still correct its behavior in the subse-quent edits and achieves a perfect edit after three steps. Overall, context-guided sequential editing effectively im-proves over single-turn editing and outperforms other se-quential editing baselines. • In Figure A8, we compare our methods against base-lines on two dependent chains with 10 editing opera-tions. Context-guided sequential editing produces a high-quality result with only one incomplete edit ( i.e ., replaced the vase with a shoe but did not continue to update its ma-terial to fabric), whereas other proprietary baselines gen-erate results with more incorrect edits. • We provide additional qualitative results (Figures A9-A21) on Complex-Edit [40] for sim-to-real generaliza-tion. In most of the real-world editing examples, we find that two-step context-guided sequential editing consis-tently demonstrates better instruction-following and iden-tity preservation capabilities compared to other baselines. However, we also observe that sequential editing can sometimes fail to execute fine-grained edits ( e.g ., A20) or overly emphasize certain effects ( e.g ., Figures A19, A21), resulting in compromised fidelity. 6Figure A3. Full illustration of 5-step decomposition for Context-Guided Editing. Decomposed Instruction over 13 editing operations: (1) Fully cover the bench vice with metal material, fully cover the bench vice with plastic material. (2) Add a vase on the floor near the yellow onion, rotate the tissue box 180 degrees, rotate the tissue box 90 degrees counter-clockwise. (3) Move the yellow onion forward, fully cover the can with glass material, fully cover the vase with glass material. (4) Replace the bench vice with a grapefruit, move the hatchet to the right, pan the camera right. (5) Fully cover the vase with metal material, move the can backward. Numbered list denotes the decomposition steps. Blue boxes indicate the correct edits, and yellow boxes indicate edits that are not fully executed. Source Image  

> Target Image Context -Guided Sequential Editing (K=5)
> Full -Context Sequential Editing (K=5)

Figure A4. Full illustration of 5-step decomposition for tasks with 5 editing operations. Instruction: (1) Add a mouse on the floor near the trivet, (2) move the bird house forward, (3) remove the frame, (4) replace the tissue box with a pomegranate, and (5) paint the cuboid wood block pink. Blue boxes indicate correct edits, whereas red boxes indicate undesired ones. Numbered list denotes the decomposition steps. 

7Source Image  

> Target Image Context -Guided Sequential Editing (K=5)
> Full -Context Sequential Editing (K=5)

Figure A5. Full illustration of 5-step decomposition for tasks with 7 editing operations and inter-step dependencies. Instruction: (1) Replace the shoe with a tissue box, (2) paint the object that was recently placed in exchange for the shoe to red, (3) move the object that was recolored near the tangerine, move the coffee canister where the shoe initially was, (4) relocate the tangerine back to where the coffee canister initially was, add a vase where the tangerine initially was, and (5) relocate the object that was added near the frame. Blue boxes indicate correct edits, whereas red boxes indicate undesired ones. Numbered list denotes the decomposition steps. Source  Target  Single -Turn Editing 

Context -Guided Sequential Editing (K=3)  Gemini 2.5 Flash Image (Three -Step) 

GPT -4o (Three -Step) 

Figure A6. Comparison for tasks with 6 editing operations. Instruction: (1) Replace the trivet with a cocoa bean, rotate the can 90 degrees counter-clockwise. (2) Remove the cocoa bean, change the floor and walls to concrete. (3) Remove the can, move the shoe near the bird house. “Single-Turn Editing” refers to the single-turn editing result from finetuned BAGEL. Red boxes indicate wrong edits. Numbered list denotes the decomposition steps. 

8Source  Target  Single -Turn Editing 

Context -Guided Sequential Editing (K=3)  Gemini 2.5 Flash Image (Three -Step) 

GPT -4o (Three -Step) Figure A7. Comparison for tasks with 5 editing operations. Instruction: Move the tissue box near the pot, paint the toaster yellow, replace the pot with a mouse, pan the camera right, and change the floor and walls to concrete. “Single-Turn Editing” refers to the single-turn editing result from finetuned BAGEL. Red boxes indicate wrong edits. Source  Target  Single -Turn Editing 

Context -Guided Sequential Editing (K=3)  GPT -4o (Three -Step)  

> GPT -4o (Single -Turn) Gemini (Single -Turn) Qwen -Image

Figure A8. Comparison for tasks with 10 editing operations and inter-step dependencies. Instruction: Make the vase smaller, add a cube wood block on the floor near the mixing bowl, change the floor to wood floor, replace the vase with a shoe, tilt the camera up, change the material of the object that was placed in exchange for the vase to fabric material, replace the yellow onion with a mouse, add a book on the floor near the mouse, tilt the camera down, and move the can to the right. “Single-Turn Editing” refers to the single-turn editing result from finetuned BAGEL. On the left, red boxes indicate wrong edits, whereas yellow boxes indicate edits that are not fully executed. Results from the proprietary baselines generally all fail to edit the image accurately. 

9Source Image  BAGEL-R 

(Single-Turn) 

BAGEL-SR 

(Single-Turn) 

BAGEL-SR 

(Context-Guided, K=2) Figure A9. Comparison for real-world editing with instruction: Change the color of the car from red to metallic blue, remove the surfboard on the car, add a luggage rack with vintage suitcases on top of the car, change the small american flag to a small french flag mounted on the same spot, replace the apartment building background with a european cobblestone street, apply a warmer lighting effect, add a soft motion blur to the surrounding environment, and crop the image to emphasize the car. Source Image  BAGEL-R 

(Single-Turn) 

BAGEL-SR 

(Single-Turn) 

BAGEL-SR 

(Context-Guided, K=2) 

Figure A10. Comparison for real-world editing with instruction: Remove the laptop from the setup, insert a bouquet of fresh flowers in place of the laptop, replace the train seat with a wooden table and an outdoor garden background, relocate the plate with grilled meat to the center, duplicate the bottle of wine and place the copy on the opposite side of the table, add warm sunlight to simulate a late afternoon ambiance, refocus composition on the plates and enhance surrounding elements, and apply a soft sepia filter. Source Image  BAGEL-R 

(Single-Turn) 

BAGEL-SR 

(Single-Turn) 

BAGEL-SR 

(Context-Guided, K=2) 

Figure A11. Comparison for real-world editing with instruction: Place a decorative vase with flowers on the table in the background, remove the glasses from the bed, reposition the striped fabric so it is neatly folded next to the location of the removed glasses, insert an extra pillow onto the bed right side, brighten the lighting slightly, add a soft glow effect, replace the visible outside portion in the mirror to show a garden view instead, and center the image frame on the bed and balance added elements. 

10 Source Image  BAGEL-R 

(Single-Turn) 

BAGEL-SR 

(Single-Turn) 

BAGEL-SR 

(Context-Guided, K=2) Figure A12. Comparison for real-world editing with instruction: Add a motion blur effect to the skateboard, replace the background with a mountainous environment, change the rider’s helmet color to bright red, add a trail of dust particles behind the skateboard, add another rider, similarly equipped, in the image, slightly behind the main subject, adjust the duplicated rider’s pose to a crouching position, apply soft lighting from the upper-left corner, and apply a warm golden evening filter. Source Image  BAGEL-R 

(Single-Turn) 

BAGEL-SR 

(Single-Turn) 

BAGEL-SR 

(Context-Guided, K=2) 

Figure A13. Comparison for real-world editing with instruction: Replace the wallpaper with a modern solid gray tile pattern, change the current wooden cabinet to a sleek, glass-door shelf, change the shower curtain to a turquoise color, add a decorative plant in a white pot on the countertop, replace the bathroom sink tap with a modern chrome tap, increase the lighting brightness, place a small anti-slip rug on the floor in front of the sink, and apply a photo filter to enhance details and colors. Source Image  BAGEL-R 

(Single-Turn) 

BAGEL-SR 

(Single-Turn) 

BAGEL-SR 

(Context-Guided, K=2) 

Figure A14. Comparison for real-world editing with instruction: Replace the background with an aesthetic library study environment, change the screen content to a natural scenery image, place a coffee cup near the keyboard, add a warm ambient light effect, reposition the cat to be seated beside the display, duplicate the cat and reposition it in the composition, modify the cats’ fur to include patterned orange highlights, and crop the image to focus on the computer setup and the cat. 

11 Source Image  BAGEL-R 

(Single-Turn) 

BAGEL-SR 

(Single-Turn) 

BAGEL-SR 

(Context-Guided, K=2) Figure A15. Comparison for real-world editing with instruction: Change the color of the refrigerator to pastel pink, add sparkles to the refrigerator’s surface, place a vase with fresh flowers on top of the refrigerator, modify the wall behind the refrigerator to a floral-patterned wallpaper, remove the appliance to the right of the refrigerator, make the refrigerator appear taller by about 20% in height, apply a warm color tone filter, and add the word ’vintage chic’ in a cursive font on the refrigerator door. Source Image  BAGEL-R 

(Single-Turn) 

BAGEL-SR 

(Single-Turn) 

BAGEL-SR 

(Context-Guided, K=2) 

Figure A16. Comparison for real-world editing with instruction: Insert a colorful beach umbrella to the left side of the image, place a seagull perched on the foremost bench, enhance lighting to resemble a sunny day, replace the overcast background with a clear sky, add subtle sparkling effects to the water, add a sandy pathway leading to the benches, scatter light sand particles near the foreground of the image, and adjust the angle so the benches align symmetrically in the middle third of the view. Source Image  BAGEL-R 

(Single-Turn) 

BAGEL-SR 

(Single-Turn) 

BAGEL-SR 

(Context-Guided, K=2) 

Figure A17. Comparison for real-world editing with instruction: Replace the surfer with a dolphin breaching out of the water, change the background houses and coastline to a tropical beach setting, add a setting sun low on the horizon in the background, apply a golden hour lighting filter over the image, add a flock of seagulls to the sky at a distance, change the water color to sparkling turquoise hues, add water sprays around the dolphin, and adjust shadows and highlights. 

12 Source Image  BAGEL-R 

(Single-Turn) 

BAGEL-SR 

(Single-Turn) 

BAGEL-SR 

(Context-Guided, K=2) Figure A18. Comparison for real-world editing with instruction: Replace the background with a sunset scene, add a lens flare effect near the sunset, change the color of the cow to spotted brown and white, add a vintage wooden cart being pulled by the cow, add soft shadows and warm lighting around the cow and cart, add small dust particles to the background, make the tree on the right taller, and apply a golden-hue filter. Source Image  BAGEL-R 

(Single-Turn) 

BAGEL-SR 

(Single-Turn) 

BAGEL-SR 

(Context-Guided, K=2) 

Figure A19. Comparison for real-world editing with instruction: Insert a large tree to the front left of the image, remove the bus on the left side of the image, replace the white car in the foreground with a vintage electric sedan, switch the background to depict a sunset scene, modify the color of the house to light blue, introduce floating leaves around the tree, dim the overall lighting, and add a light glow effect near the sun. Source Image  BAGEL-R 

(Single-Turn) 

BAGEL-SR 

(Single-Turn) 

BAGEL-SR 

(Context-Guided, K=2) 

Figure A20. Comparison for real-world editing with instruction: Change the bed linens color from blue to neutral gray, place an open book on the side of the bed, add a houseplant in a ceramic pot on top of the cabinet, increase the brightness of the light from the wall sconce, alter the bed’s headboard fabric to textured velvet, shift the side lamp to the left of the bed, apply a warmer tone filter to the image, and introduce sunlight rays coming through the window. 

13 Source Image  BAGEL-R 

(Single-Turn) 

BAGEL-SR 

(Single-Turn) 

BAGEL-SR 

(Context-Guided, K=2) Figure A21. Comparison for real-world editing with instruction: Replace the dog with a fox, replace the grass background with a snowy forest scene, change the sheep’s texture to resemble a rocky shape, modify the lighting to simulate a cold, wintry evening, introduce a snowfall effect, add a faint magical glow around the fox, alter the fox’s color to a striking silver shade, and reframe the composition to focus on the fox and the modified object. 

14