Title: D-OPSD: On-Policy Self-Distillation for Continuously Tuning Step-Distilled Diffusion Models

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2605.05204v1

Published Time: Thu, 07 May 2026 01:25:43 GMT

Number of Pages: 22

Markdown Content:
# -Image 

# D-OPSD: On-Policy Self-Distillation for Continuously Tuning Step-Distilled Diffusion Models 

Dengyang Jiang 1,2 Xin Jin 2 Dongyang Liu 4,2 Zanyi Wang 3 Mingzhe Zheng 1 Ruoyi Du 2

Xiangpeng Yang 2 Qilong Wu 2 Zhen Li 2 Peng Gao 2✉ Harry Yang 1✉ Steven C.H. Hoi 21The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology 2Z-Image Team, Alibaba Group 

> 3

University of California, San Diego 4The Chinese University of Hong Kong 

https://vvvvvjdy.github.io/d-opsd 

## Abstract 

The landscape of high-performance image generation models is currently shifting from the inefficient multi-step ones to the efficient few-step coun-terparts (e.g, Z-Image-Turbo and FLUX.2-klein). However, these mod-els present significant challenges for directly continuous supervised fine-tuning. For example, applying the commonly used fine-tuning technique would compromises their inherent few-step inference capability. To ad-dress this, we propose D-OPSD , a novel training paradigm for step-distilled diffusion models that enables on-policy learning during super-vised fine-tuning. We first find that the modern diffusion model where the LLM/VLM serves as the encoder can inherit its encoder’s in-context capabilities. This enables us to make the training as an on-policy self-distillation process. Specifically, during training, we make the model acts as both the teacher and the student with different contexts, where the stu-dent is conditioned only on the text feature, while the teacher is condi-tioned on the multimodal feature of both the text prompt and the target image. Training minimizes the two predicted distributions over the stu-dent’s own roll-outs. By optimized on the model’s own trajectory and un-der it’s own supervision, D-OPSD enables the model to learn new concept, style, etc. without sacrificing the original few-step capacity. 

## 1 Introduction 

Recent years have seen significant progress in text-to-image (T2I) generation, with mod-els advancing from synthesizing rudimentary textures to producing images that exhibit strong adherence to semantic descriptions [93, 3, 4, 17, 101, 6, 83, 23, 63]. However, the sampling process typically requires numerous iterative denoising steps [88, 32, 48], lead-ing to substantial latency and computational cost in practice. To address this, researchers have developed various step-distillation techniques [56, 112, 58, 111, 9] that substantially reduce the number of function evaluations (NFEs). Furthermore, recent advances in distil-lation methodology [49, 38, 111, 12, 59] have enabled state-of-the-art open-source few-step diffusion models to surpass their multi-step predecessors not only in sampling efficiency but also in generated image quality. As a result, such few-step models are increasingly adopted in practical production settings. Despite these advances, how to continually finetune these models remains unclear. Astraightforward solution is to apply the standard supervised fine-tuning objective used in the multi-step counterpart [48, 52], i.e., feeding a noised target image into the model and supervising it with the corresponding flow-matching target. 2 However, this training signal is defined on external induced states of the target image that belongs to an offline data dis-tribution, rather than on the states actually visited by the model’s own few-step sampler. For step-distilled models, whose generation quality relies on a small number of carefully                                    

> ✉Corresponding authors
> 2In this paper, we mainly discuss flow-matching models, as they are currently the default choice in the field. Tech Report (D-OPSD)
> arXiv:2605.05204v1 [cs.CV] 6 May 2026 Thecoastalport,withtheemeraldgreensea,several
> woodenboats,blueskyandwhiteclouds.
> Atigerstandsinagrassyscene.
> targetim
> The wolf plushie sits on wooden floor, facing the camera,
> against the wall.
> A close-up of a pair of sunglasses.
> ggenw/textgenw/text+imgtargetimggenw/textgenw/text+img
> style
> style
> concept
> concept

Figure 1: We empirically investigate the visual appearance of generated images when con-ditioned on only the text prompt feature or the multimodal feature of target image and the text prompt using Z-Image Turbo [93] with 8 steps. Investigation of FLUX.2-klein [4] is provided in Appendix A. distilled denoising updates, such a mismatch can easily perturb the learned few-step dy-namics and degrade inference quality. This effect is also borne out empirically: across our experiments, and echoed by community reports, standard SFT often compromises the model’s original distilled few-step ability to generate high quality images. Online Rein-forcement learning (RL), in contrast, would not impair the few-step capabilities when used as training algorithm for the model [38, 57], this is because it optimizes the model on sam-ples generated by the current model and derives the learning signal on the same sampled trajectory. However, it requires a well-designed reward function [105, 51, 106, 117], which is not feasible for most secondary developers in the community, as they usually have only the image-text pairs to customize concepts, styles, etc. Thus, we assume that a suitable continuous-tuning strategy should be a combination of the two: it should update the model on its own roll-outs, and it should incorporate su-pervision from paired image-text data on those same visited states. A natural candidate is on-policy self-distillation (OPSD), which has recently been studied in autoregressive large language models [84, 108, 116, 28]. OPSD retains the appeal of on-policy learning while avoiding explicit reward design: the model samples from its current policy as a student, while a stronger teacher distribution is obtained by conditioning the same model on richer in-context information [100, 5]. This perspective is particularly appealing in our setting, be-cause the target image in each training pair naturally provides the supervision. However, directly transferring the idea of OPSD to diffusion models is nontrivial. In text generation with LLMs, the context can simply be appended to the input sequence. In diffusion mod-els, by contrast, directly feeding the target image into the denoising process would alter the trajectory itself, reducing the formulation back to the standard off-policy SFT regime. The key challenge is therefore: how can target-image information be introduced as stronger context while keeping the student’s few-step roll-out unchanged? 

We address this challenge by proposing D-OPSD . Unlike earlier T2I diffusion models that used T5 [73] or CLIP [70] as the encoder [66, 3, 17], current state-of-the-art diffusion models increasingly adopt LLM/VLM backbones [99, 107] as their encoders [4, 93, 101]. This raises a natural question: can the subsequent diffusion model inherit the encoder’s in-context ca-pability? As shown in Figure 1, we find that the answer is yes. When replacing text-only features with multimodal features extracted from both the text prompt and the target im-age, the diffusion model can already generate variations that preserve the target concept or style (see gen w/text+img), even without any additional training. This emergent behavior enables us to instantiate OPSD in diffusion models. Specifically, during training, we assign the same model two roles: a student conditioned only on the text feature, and a teacher conditioned on the multimodal feature of the text prompt and the target image. We then distill the teacher’s predictions into the student along the student’s own roll-outs, yielding a one-stage on-policy framework that injects target-image information without requiring external modules or reward design. 2We evaluate D-OPSD in the settings of both LoRA training on small customized dataset and full fine-tuning on larger dataset, the results show that our method enables the model to acquire new knowledge (e.g, specific concept,style) from the target image-text pair while preserving its original few-step inference capability. Furthermore, rather than learning via overfitting to the training pair, the acquired knowledge with our method demonstrates strong generalization across unseen prompt (e.g, generating training concepts in different scenarios). These results suggest promising prospects for the continual learning of step-distilled diffusion models. In summary, our main contributions are as follows: • We identify an emergent property of modern text to image diffusion models with LLM/VLM encoders and utilize this property to the continuous tuning of step-distilled diffusion model. • We propose D-OPSD, a novel diffusion models on-policy self-distillation framework. By assigning the same model two roles with different contexts, D-OPSD enables supervised tuning on the student’s own roll-outs without requiring any external reward function or extra modules. • We validate D-OPSD in different settings. The results show that our method enables the model to learn new concepts, styles, and domain preferences while preserving its original few-step inference capability and previous knowledge. 

## 2 Method 

2.1 Background 

In this study, our goal is to continually tune a step-distilled diffusion model on super-vised image-text pairs while preserving its original few-step inference capability. As dis-cussed in Section 1, this is difficult for conventional fine-tuning. Vanilla SFT optimizes the model on noised target images rather than on the states visited by its own sampler, and the supervision is provided by an external target velocity that is unavailable at infer-ence time [48, 52]. Such a train test mismatch may make the model acquire new concepts or styles at the cost of distorting the previously distilled few-step generation distribution (distribution shift). Online-RL-style methods are more compatible with this setting be-cause they optimize the model on its own roll-outs and derive supervision from the same on-policy samples [51, 106, 105], but they rely on carefully designed reward functions or preference signals [103, 42], which are typically unavailable in practical customization sce-narios. We address this gap by constructing an on-policy self-distillation framework for diffusion models, which uses only paired image-text data and does not require any exter-nal reward. 

2.2 D-OPSD OPSD in LLMs and our solution for implication in diffusion models. On-policy self-distillation (OPSD) is first proposed in language models with a simple idea: the same model can act as both a student and a teacher under different contexts. Given an input query 𝑞 , let 𝑟 denote additional in-context information, such as demonstrations, intermedi-ate reasoning, or the ground-truth response [116, 84, 28, 79]. The student predicts under the weaker context 𝑞 , while the teacher predicts under the stronger context (𝑞 , 𝑟 ). Let 𝜋 𝜃 (· | 𝑞 )

denote the student distribution and 𝜋 ¯𝜃 (· | 𝑞 , 𝑟 ) the teacher distribution. OPSD optimizes the student on its own sampled outputs ˆ 𝑜 ∼ 𝜋 𝜃 (· | 𝑞 ), and minimizes a divergence between the teacher and student predictions on that on-policy sample: 

LLLM OPSD = Eˆ𝑜 ∼𝜋 𝜃 (· | 𝑞 ) [𝐷 (𝜋 ¯𝜃 (· | 𝑞 , 𝑟 ), 𝜋 𝜃 (· | 𝑞 ))] . (1) This formulation inherits two key properties of on-policy learning: it updates the model on samples produced by the current policy, and the supervision is computed under the same sampled trajectory instead of being borrowed from an external offline distribution. The challenge in transferring this training paradigm to diffusion models lies in how to con-struct the stronger context. In LLMs, the extra information 𝑟 can be natively appended to 3Student    

> Model
> Teacher
> Model
> Student
> Model
> on-policy sampling
> Encoder
> Red Hanfu
> woman, neon ⚡,
> fan, 大雁塔 night
> target image
> text prompt
> multimodal feature
> (text&img)
> text feature
> EMA
> on-policy
> distillation
> gradient

Figure 2: Method overview. For each training pair, we first pass the prompt alone and the prompt together with the target image through the encoder to obtain 𝑐 𝑠 and 𝑐 𝑡 , respectively. We then sample a few-step trajectory using the student branch conditioned on 𝑐 𝑠 . After that, the teacher and student predict velocities on the same trajectory states, and the student is updated by Equation 7. After training, the teacher branch is discarded, and inference uses exactly the same few-step text-to-image pipeline as the original step-distilled model. the input sequence [100, 5]. In diffusion models, however, the desired supervision is an image, and one cannot simply insert the target image into the denoising trajectory in the same way without returning to the standard off-policy SFT setting (e.g, Once the noisy target image is fed directly into the model like traditional training does, the sampling tra-jectory is disrupted, reducing the process to a supervision paradigm analogous to teacher forcing in large language models [71, 72, 91].). This challenge suggests that the stronger context in diffusion models need to be introduced through a representation that enriches the model’s conditioning space while leaving the student’s roll-outs unchanged. In other words, to make OPSD applicable to diffusion models, we need a mechanism that incorpo-rates target-image information without replacing the student’s own sampled states. We solve this by utilizing the property of modern diffusion models. As we analyse in Section 1 and Figure 1, current SOTA few-step models often adopt LLM/VLM backbones as their encoders and we find that the subsequent diffusion model can inherit the encoder’s in-context capability: when conditioned on the multimodal feature extracted from both the text prompt and the target image, the model can already produce variations that preserve the target concept or style, even without additional training. This observation allows us to instantiate OPSD in diffusion models by treating the target image as in-context supervision, rather than as a direct denoising target. 

Formulating OPSD for diffusion models. The overall framework and pseudocode of our method D-OPSD can be seen in Figure 2 and Algorithm 1. Specifically, we consider the model parameterized by 𝜃 , whose velocity field is denoted by 𝑣 𝜃 (𝑥 𝑡 , 𝑡 , 𝑐 ), where 𝑥 𝑡 is the latent state at time 𝑡 ∈ [ 0, 1 ] and 𝑐 is the condition feature. During inference, the model defines an ODE trajectory: 

𝑑𝑥 𝑡 

𝑑𝑡 = 𝑣 𝜃 (𝑥 𝑡 , 𝑡 , 𝑐 ), (2) which is solved with a small number of time steps by the few-step sampler (e.g, 4 or 8). Let 1 = 𝑡 𝐾 > 𝑡 𝐾 −1 > · · · > 𝑡 0 = 0 denote the inference schedule. Starting from Gaussian noise 

𝑥 𝑠 𝑡 𝐾 ∼ N ( 0, 𝐼 ), the student roll-outs is generated by: 

𝑥 𝑠 𝑡 𝑘 −1 = Φ  𝑥 𝑠 𝑡 𝑘 , 𝑡 𝑘 , 𝑡 𝑘 −1, 𝑣 𝜃 (· , ·, 𝑐 𝑠 ) , 𝑘 = 𝐾 , . . . , 1, (3) where Φ denotes the same few-step solver used at test time, and 𝑐 𝑠 is the student condition. For each training pair (𝑥 0, 𝑦 ), we construct two conditions from the same encoder: 

𝑐 𝑠 = 𝑓 text ( 𝑦 ), 𝑐 𝑡 = 𝑓 mm ( 𝑦 , 𝑥 0), (4) where 𝑓 text encodes only the text prompt and 𝑓 mm encodes the multimodal context consist-ing of the text prompt and the target image. The student is conditioned only on 𝑐 𝑠 , so its inference pathway is exactly the original text-to-image generation process. The teacher is conditioned on 𝑐 𝑡 , which provides additional information about the target concept, style, or preference to be learned. 4Given the on-policy trajectory from the student {𝑥 𝑠 𝑡 𝑘 }𝐾 𝑘 =1, we evaluate both branches on the same visited states: 

𝑢 𝑠 𝑘 = 𝑣 𝜃 (𝑥 𝑠 𝑡 𝑘 , 𝑡 𝑘 , 𝑐 𝑠 ), (5) 

𝑢 𝑡 𝑘 = 𝑣 ¯𝜃 (𝑥 𝑠 𝑡 𝑘 , 𝑡 𝑘 , 𝑐 𝑡 ), (6) where ¯ 𝜃 denotes the teacher parameters. We then train the student to match the teacher’s velocity prediction by minimizing: 

LD−OPSD = E(𝑥 0,𝑦 )

"

1

𝐾 

> 𝐾

∑︁ 

> 𝑘 =1

𝑢 𝑠 𝑘 − sg (𝑢 𝑡 𝑘 ) 22

#

, (7) where sg (·) denotes stop-gradient operation. In this way, the student is optimized on its own roll-outs states, while the teacher provides a stronger supervision signal through mul-timodal context. Algorithm 1: Training Procedure of D-OPSD 

Require: Training pairs D = {( 𝑥 0, 𝑦 )} 

Require: Inference schedule {𝑡 0, . . . , 𝑡 𝐾 } and Solver Φ

Require: Base model 𝑣 𝜙 , Student and Teacher model 𝑣 𝜃 ,

𝑣 ¯𝜃  

> 1:

Initialize student weights 𝜃 ← 𝜙  

> 2:

Initialize teacher weights ¯ 𝜃 ← 𝜙  

> 3:

while not converged do  

> 4:

Sample a mini-batch (𝑥 0, 𝑦 ) ∼ D  

> 5:

Encode student condition 𝑐 𝑠 ← 𝑓 text ( 𝑦 ) 

> 6:

Encode teacher condition 𝑐 𝑡 ← 𝑓 mm ( 𝑦 , 𝑥 0) 

> 7:

Initialize 𝑥 𝑠 𝑡 𝐾 ∼ N ( 0, 𝐼 ) 

> 8:

Initialize LD−OPSD ← 0 

> 9:

for 𝑘 = 𝐾 , . . . , 1 do  

> 10:

𝑢 𝑠 𝑘 ← 𝑣 𝜃 (𝑥 𝑠 𝑡 𝑘 , 𝑡 𝑘 , 𝑐 𝑠 ) 

> 11:

𝑢 𝑡 𝑘 ← 𝑣 ¯𝜃 (𝑥 𝑠 𝑡 𝑘 , 𝑡 𝑘 , 𝑐 𝑡 ) 

> 12:

LD−OPSD ← L D−OPSD + 1 

> 𝐾

∥𝑢 𝑠 𝑘 − sg (𝑢 𝑡 𝑘 )∥ 22 

> 13:

if 𝑘 > 1 then  

> 14:

𝑥 𝑠 𝑡 𝑘 −1 ← sg (Φ(𝑥 𝑠 𝑡 𝑘 , 𝑡 𝑘 , 𝑡 𝑘 −1, 𝑢 𝑠 𝑘 ))  

> 15:

end if  

> 16:

end for  

> 17:

Update student model 𝜃 by minimizing LD−OPSD  

> 18:

Update teacher model via EMA  

> 19:

end while 

Note that Equation 7 can be viewed as the diffusion counter-part of Equation 1. At a high level, the analogy is straight-forward: the student’s sampled response in LLMs corresponds here to the student’s denois-ing trajectory, and the teacher’s stronger prediction under richer context is realized as a stronger conditional denoising field. The main difference lies in the out-put space of the model. Autore-gressive LLMs produce a dis-crete token distribution [71, 94], so the teacher-student align-ment can be written directly as a divergence between vo-cabulary distributions [116, 84]. Flow-matching diffusion mod-els, by contrast, do not expose such a discrete predictive dis-tribution at each step. Instead, they parameterize the denois-ing dynamics through a condi-tional velocity field, whose pre-dictions determine the evolu-tion of the sample trajectory [48, 52, 90]. For this reason, we instantiate the teacher-student alignment in Eq. 7 as a mean-squared error between velocity predictions on the same on-policy states. Although this objective is not a token-level KL divergence [44], it serves the same role in our setting: it pulls the student’s conditional generation dynamics toward those of the teacher, thereby aligning the induced trajectory distribution under a stronger multimodal context. The un-derlying principle therefore remains unchanged: the model learns from its own trajectory under a stronger self-generated supervision signal. 

Discussion on why D-OPSD preserves few-step capability. Compared with vanilla SFT, our method avoids forcing the model to fit target-image states that never appear in its own few-step sampling process. Instead, optimization is always performed on the student’s actual roll-outs, which substantially reduces the mismatch between training and inference. As a result, D-OPSD provides an on-policy supervised training paradigm for step-distilled diffusion models, enabling them to learn new concepts, styles, or domain preferences from the target images while retaining the original few-step sampling behavior. More discussion and comparison of different training paradigms are provided in Appendix B. 5Table 1: System-level comparison against baseline methods in LoRA training settings. 

The best and second-best results on each metric are highlighted in bold and underlined. Method DINO-D ↓ LPIPS-D ↓ VLM-J ↑ CLIP-S ↑ Quality-S ↑ Aesthetic-S ↑                                                                        

> Z-Image-Turbo
> Base-Model 0.2373 0.7520 1.0000 0.3043 3.5088 2.9667 Vanilla SFT 0.2212 0.6501 1.3293 0.3095 2.4236 2.3582 SFT + LoRA on distilled 0.1588 0.7243 1.8525 0.3201 3.6081 3.0027 Dreambooth 0.0902 0.6424 3.0625 0.3328 2.5582 2.3755 PSO 0.0570 0.4974 3.3333 0.2893 3.3422 3.0820 D-OPSD (ours) 0.0823 0.5803 3.3333 0.3664 3.7965 3.1710
> FLUX.2-klein
> Base-Model 0.2386 0.7518 1.0000 0.3020 3.5076 2.9665 Vanilla SFT 0.2212 0.6500 1.2083 0.3002 2.4119 2.3595 SFT + LoRA on distilled 0.1564 0.7288 1.0000 0.3151 3.6079 3.0021 Dreambooth 0.1053 0.6824 3.0283 0.3266 2.5492 2.3683 PSO 0.0593 0.5120 3.3015 0.2801 3.3258 3.0566 D-OPSD (ours) 0.0822 0.5648 3.1255 0.3689 3.7957 3.1521

## 3 Experiment 

3.1 Experimental Setup Implementation. We use Z-Image-Turbo 6B [93] and FLUX.2-klein 4B [4] as our baseline model to conduct experiment. Detailed experimental implementation, including hyperpa-rameter settings, GPU resources and other training configs are provided in Appendix C. 

Evaluation. We use the same inference settings as the original step-distilled model across all methods. We choose to report DINO distance (DINO-D) [7], LPIPS distance (LPIPS-D) [115], Fréchet inception distance (FID [30]) for testing whether the model can learn from the target images, VLM’s judgment of subject or style consistency (VLM-J), CLIP Score (CLIP-S) [29] for testing whether the model can generalize with the learned new knowledge, the Quality Score (Quality-S) and Aesthetic Score (Aesthetic-S) from the re-ward model for testing whether the model maintain its few-step sampling capacity, as well as Geneval [21] and DPG [34] score to test whether the model retain its previous knowl-edge. Detailed explanation of how the evaluation set is constructed and how each metric is obtained are in Appendix D. 

Methods for comparison. We compare with several representative baseline methods: (a). directly training with vanilla flow-matching loss [48] (Vanilla SFT). (b). training on the original multi-step model then adding LoRA on the step-distilled model (SFT + LoRA on distilled). (c). Dreambooth style training [78] (Dreambooth). (d). PSO training [62] (PSO). 3

3.2 Main Results D-OPSD for LoRA training on small customized dataset. We first evaluate D-OPSD in the setting of LoRA training on small customized datasets. In this setting, the goal is to learn a new concept from only a few image–text pairs (e.g., 4 examples) while still being able to generalize beyond the training set. We conduct training and evaluation on the Dream-Booth dataset [78] together with a small amount of stylized data. As shown in Table 1, our method substantially outperforms both the base model and SFT style training on DINO-D, LPIPS-D, and VLM-J. Moreover, as illustrated in Figure 3, after training, our method can generalize the newly learned concept beyond the training distribution, e.g., generating the learned object in novel scene that do not appear in the training data, while preserving the original model’s ability to produce high-quality images with a small number of inference steps. In contrast, other baselines such as SFT and DreamBooth training lose the ability to generate high-quality images under the few-step inference setting, as reflected by the 

> 3PSO can be regarded as a variant of the Diffusion-DPO [95] for step-distilled model because it only conducts training at the few-step sampling timestep, but it still uses the target image state as input and uses the ground truth velocity for supervision. (More discussions are provided in Appendix B)

6Table 2: System-level comparison against baseline methods in full-finetuning settings. 

The best and second-best results on each metric are highlighted in bold and underlined. Method FID ↓ DINO-D ↓ LPIPS-D ↓ Quality-S ↑ Aesthetic-S ↑ Geneval ↑ DPG ↑

Z-Image-Turbo 

Base-Model 48.6858 0.1274 0.7036 3.7624 3.5218 0.7543 84.7645 

Vanilla SFT 82.2036 0.1896 0.6787 2.6121 2.4852 0.1588 69.9746 PSO 88.4343 0.1716 0.6530 2.8653 2.6424 0.2475 72.7363 D-OPSD (ours) 40.4938 0.1088 0.6419 3.8438 3.6195 0.7170 84.1116 

FLUX.2-klein 

Base Model 45.2335 0.1210 0.6894 3.7626 3.4465 0.8155 85.5624 

Vanilla SFT 98.7893 0.2565 0.6567 2.5038 2.4121 0.1113 56.2138 PSO 82.1438 0.2185 0.6511 2.8066 2.5952 0.2406 63.4174 D-OPSD (ours) 38.2932 0.0902 0.6476 3.8328 3.5511 0.7298 83.8927 Training Samples Base Model SFT PSO D-OPSD (ours) 

> [V] is located in the center of a transparent glass viewing platform suspended above
> the clouds. Beneath it is an starry sky, and around it float glowing crystal lights. .
> A still life painting featuring [V] placed on a wooden table, with a white cup on the
> right, set against a mottled white wall, in a calm and elegant style.
> [V] resting sideways in a glowing underwater forest, lit by blue-green light from
> above, with luminous jellyfish in the background, calm and elegant.
> A deer stands in the magical forest, surrounded by plants and mist. The ground is
> covered with fallen leaves, and the entire scene has an [V] style.

Figure 3: Visual comparison between baseline methods and ours finetuned on Z-Image-Turbo under customized training settings. Vanilla SFT training sacrifices the original few-step capacity, and PSO suffers from the overfitting to training set, whereas our method enables the step-distilled model to continuously learn new concepts while maintaining the few-step capacity. large drops in Quality-S and Aesthetic-S in Table 1, as well as the blurry images shown in the Figure 3. PSO, on the other hand, tends to overfit the training set: although it can capture the target concept, its ability to follow novel instructions degrades substantially, as indicated by the decline in CLIP-S and its failure to generate scenes beyond those in the training data. 

D-OPSD for full finetuning on larger scale dataset. We next evaluate D-OPSD in the set-ting of full finetuning on larger scale dataset. In this setting, the goal is to test whether by fine-tuning, the model can be biased towards a certain preference or domain (in our experiment, it is “anime" domain), and suffer from catastrophic forgetting of previously 7Base Model SFT PSO D-OPSD (ours) Base Model SFT PSO D-OPSD (ours)  

> Fintuning Domain
> （New Knowledge Acquire) Original Domain
> （Prior Knowledge Retain)

Figure 4: Visual comparison between baseline methods and ours finetuned on Z-Image-Turbo under full-finetuning settings. SFT and PSO training sacrifices the original few-step capacity, whereas our method enables the step-distilled model to continuously learn to bias target domain while maintaining the few-step capacity as well as the learned knowledge in the original domain. learned knowledge. We conduct training and evaluation on the in-house high quality anime dataset. As shown in Table 2, our method substantially outperforms both the base model and other training method on FID, DINO-D, and LPIPS-D, suggesting the output of the model after finetuning is more likely to be closer to the target distribution. Meanwhile, our method is still able to adapt to the new distribution while retaining the model’s original knowledge as well as few-step inference ability. This can be observed from the GenEval and DPG results in the Table 2 and Figure 4, where our method shows no catastrophic degradation after fine-tuning. Although there is a slight drop in benchmark score com-pared with the base model, we believe this reflects a trade-off introduced by adapting the model to a new distribution whose domain differ from those emphasized by the bench-marks. In contrast, both SFT and PSO fail to simultaneously adapt to the new domain and preserve the model’s few-step inference capability in the full-finetuning on large-scale dataset setting. This is evident from the sharp declines across multiple metrics in Table 2, as well as the blurry generated images shown in Figure 4. 

3.3 Ablation Study Effect of on-policy self distillation. Our method consists of two key components: on-policy sampling and on-policy distillation. To elucidate the role of each component, we conduct four groups of ablation studies in isolation: (1) SFT from target images, which is identical to the vanilla training setting with flow-matching loss. (2) SFT from teacher samples, where we replace the target images with samples generated by conditioning on multimodal features extracted from the target image and the text prompt, and use these generated samples as the new targets for SFT. (3) Off-policy distillation, where the student model is trained to align with the teacher’s outputs on a fixed dataset. (4) On-policy dis-tillation, which corresponds to our proposed method. As shown in the two left plots of Figure 5, vanilla SFT with the flow-matching loss gradually impairs the model’s ability to generate high-quality images with few steps, as reflected by the progressive decline in the Quality Score. Self-distillation-based schemes effectively mitigate this issue. Compared with the off-policy distillation variant, our method achieves the fastest training conver-gence, as evidenced by the highest DINO similarity to the target images, while simultane-ously maintaining the best generation quality. 

Construction of the teacher model. As our method is a self-distillation framework, we study several way to build the teacher model. First, we find using the frozen base model as the teacher yields stable training and effective results. We then study the commonly used EMA operations [36], like observations in other self-distillation works [39, 7, 119], we also find that it requires a large momentum coefficient to stabilize training, for example, directly 8(a) Ablation on the training strategy (b) Ablation on construction of the teacher model Figure 5: Ablation on (a) the different training strategies, and (b) the different way to build teacher model . We report the curves across training steps of DINO feature similarity between the generated images and the targets, as well as the Quality Score of the generated images. Training conducted on Z-Image-Turbo with LoRA. Better to zoom in to check the difference. use the student copy leads to training collapse. In our experiment, using EMA teacher with the momentum coefficient 0,9999 leads to the best results, we assume that it because this an not only extremely smooth the high-variance alignment target to make training stable, but also tracks the student’s progress for better distillation. 

## 4 Discussion on Limitations and Future Works 

Computation cost. Like other on-policy distillation method [116, 84, 1], our method also need an on-policy roll-outs of student and a teacher inference during training, which re-sults in roughly 4 × computational cost in FLOPs and 2 × training time per iteration com-pared to vanilla SFT. However, in our task, continually tuning of few-step diffusion models, we consider this cost acceptable. This is because SFT would degrade the model’s few-step generation capability; when the computational cost of the re-distillation stage is taken into account, our method is in fact more resource efficient. target image teacher sample before training after training 

> [v *] sits on the windowsill edge, with a cityscape background, shot from the side.

Figure 6: When the teacher model fails to generate images consistent with the concept ID under multimodal condition and therefore cannot provide an effective supervision sig-nal, training will fail. 

Requirements for teacher capability. The success of D-OPSD is contingent upon the base model’s in-context abilities. In spe-cific, as shown in Figure 6, even when con-ditioned on the multimodal feature of tar-get image and the text prompt, the subse-quent diffusion model still can not gener-ate the meaningful supervision signals, the training would fail. 

Future Works. In this work, we intro-duce on-policy self-distillation to image generation and show that it is a promising paradigm for continuously training step-distilled diffusion models. Building on this framework, several directions merit further study. First, an important open question is how to construct richer teacher-side context (conditioning). One possibility is to incorporate stronger conditional signals from image editing models [23, 43, 46] or video generation models [96, 27, 82]. Second, how to leverage other training target in D-OPSD, for example by combining our framework with additional training constraints [68, 39]. Third, it is worth exploring whether multi-expert OPD [15, 26] can be introduced into the post-training stage of diffusion models based on D-OPSD loss. A possible strategy is to first train domain-specific experts using RL or SFT, and then dis-till these experts back into a single base model within our framework. More broadly, We hope our study provide useful insights for future research on post-training and continuous adaptation in diffusion-based generation. 

## 5 Related Work 

We highlight key related studies here and defer discussion of the others to Appendix E. 9Step-distilled diffusion models. To accelerate diffusion model inference for enhancing productivity, various timestep distillation methods have been proposed to compresses the original model into a generator capable of few-step sampling [112, 56, 81, 58, 55, 60]. This is typically achieved either by distilling the trajectory [56, 75, 118, 9] or from the distribu-tion [112, 111, 38, 12, 80, 81, 54]. Although a significant effort has been made to ensure the quality of the generated contents while reducing the number of inference steps, contin-ual fine-tuning on these distilled models still faces the challenge of how to preserve their few-step inference capability when learning new things. In this work, we solve this by utilizing the in-context capacity of the diffusion model’s encoders to develop an on-policy self-distillation framework that enables the continuous learning of the model under its own supervision, without sacrificing its original few-step inference capability. 

On-policy self-distillation. In the field large language models, on-policy distillation is pro-posed to mitigates the train-test mismatch issues caused by off-policy SFT or knowledge distillation [1, 89, 53, 37]. However, it still requires an external stronger teacher model as the guidance. Therefore, on-policy self-distillation is proposed, which enables the model itself to act as a teacher by leveraging its own in-context capabilities within the pre-existing context (e.g, demonstration, answer) [116, 110, 84, 79, 108, 28]. Unlike these works which focused on text generation with autoregressive large language models, our approach show that how to utilize on-policy self-distillation in image generation for continuously training step-distilled diffusion models. 

## 6 Conclusion 

In this work, we present D-OPSD, an effective diffusion models’ on-policy self-distillation framework for continual tuning of step-distilled models. Our method is built on the observation that modern diffusion models with LLM/VLM encoders inherit an emer-gent in-context capability, which allows the same model to act as a student under text-only conditioning and as a teacher under stronger multimodal conditioning. By distill-ing the teacher’s predictions on the student’s own few-step roll-outs, D-OPSD enables di-rect supervised adaptation without external rewards or auxiliary training stages and mod-ules. Experiments across both LoRA adaptation and full fine-tuning demonstrate that our method effectively learns new concepts, styles, and domain preferences while preserving the original few-step generation ability and prior knowledge. We hope this work can stim-ulate future research on on-policy distillation for diffusion models, from algorithm inno-vations to broader real world applications, as diffusion models continue to evolve. 

## 7 Acknowledgment 

Since the release of Z-Image-Turbo, we are grateful to the community for many interest-ing explorations into the internal mechanisms of step-distilled models and how to conduct continuous training [64, 87, 41, 77], and our work is also inspired by these interesting at-tempts. We cannot list all the works here, but we still want to express our gratitude to all the talented community ‘artists’! 10 Appendix A Investigation of FLUX.2-klein 

We also perform a similar analysis with FLUX.2-klein [4] like those have done in Figure 1, as shown in Figure 7, the similar behavior can be seen, suggesting that this inherited in-context capability is broadly applicable to diffusion models that employ LLM/VLMs as encoders. The coastal port, with the emerald green sea, several                           

> woodenboats,blueskyandwhiteclouds.
> Atigerstandsinagrassyscene.
> targetim
> The wolf plushie sits on wooden floor, facing the
> camera, against the wall.
> A close-up of a pair of sunglasses.
> ggenw/textgenw/text+imgtargetimggenw/textgenw/text+img
> style
> style
> concept
> concept

Figure 7: We also empirically investigate the difference of generated images when con-ditioned on only the text feature or the multimodal feature of target image and the text prompt using FLUX.2-klein-4B with 4 steps. Similar to Z-Image-Turbo, using multimodal features as condition instead of text-only features allows the model to produce image vari-ations while maintaining the target image’s underlying concept or stylistic identity. 

## B Discussion and Comparison of Different Training Paradigms 

Table 3 summarizes the main differences among representative training paradigms for con-tinually tuning step-distilled diffusion models. We compare them along four dimensions: the form of supervision signal, whether training is on-policy, whether an additional re-ward model or reward function is required, and whether the training process matches the model’s inference behavior. Table 3: Comparison of different training paradigms regarding the source of the supervi-sion signal, the learning paradigm (whether its in an on-policy way), the necessity of an auxiliary reward model, and the consistency between training-time inference-time state. Method Supervision Signal On-Policy Reward Model Train-Inference Match SFT GT velocity × × ×             

> RL-offline (e.g, Diffusion-DPO [95], PSO [62]) GT velocity pairs (+/−) ×××
> RL-online (e.g, ReFL [105], flow-grpo [51] reward function ✓✓✓
> D-OPSD (ours) self-distilled velocity ✓×✓

Vanilla SFT. Vanilla supervised fine-tuning optimizes the model using the target im-age as the source of supervision. In flow-matching models, this means that training is performed on noised states constructed from the ground-truth image, with the model re-gressed toward the corresponding ground-truth velocity. While this objective is standard for training diffusion models from scratch, it is mismatched to continual tuning of step-distilled models. The reason is that both the optimization states and the supervision signal are induced by the target image, rather than by the model’s own few-step sampling trajec-tory. As a result, although the model can absorb new concepts or styles from the training pairs, we suppose that it may do so by altering the distilled generation dynamics that are responsible for high-quality few-step sampling. 11 Offline RL-style methods. A natural alternative is to replace direct regression on a sin-gle target with preference-style or pairwise supervision. Representative examples include Diffusion-DPO [95] and PSO [62]. These methods can be viewed as offline RL-style ob-jectives, in the sense that their supervision is still derived from a fixed dataset (use target image related states as inputs and relies on ground-truth-velocity-based pairwise supervi-sion). Therefore, although method like PSO try to specially adapt the few-step models, its optimization states and supervision signal are still not fully induced by the student’s own current distribution. This also explains why in our experimental results, PSO can often learn the target appearance but tends to overfit the training set in the small dataset and fail to learn in the large-scale settings. 

Online RL-style methods. Online RL methods, such as ReFL [105] and flow-GRPO [51], are conceptually more suitable for preserving the behavior of step-distilled models because they optimize the model on its own sampled trajectories. In these methods, the model first generates images on-policy, and the resulting samples are then scored by a reward function or reward model. As such, both the optimization states and the supervision signal are tied to the current sampling process, substantially reducing the mismatch between training and inference. This is also an important reason why some studies that preform RL on the step-distilled model can make the model align with human preference without compromising the original few-step ability [38, 59]. However, this advantage comes at the cost of requiring a well-designed reward function or preference model. In practical customization scenarios, especially when secondary developers only possess a small number of image-text pairs, such reward design is often the main bottleneck. 

Our method. Our method occupies a different point in this design space. Like online RL, D-OPSD is on-policy: optimization is performed on the student’s own few-step roll-outs, so the model is always updated on states that it actually visits at inference time. More importantly, the supervision signal is also defined on these same states. Instead of introducing the target image as an external denoising target, D-OPSD uses it only to enrich the teacher’s condition through multimodal in-context encoding, and supervises the student with self-distilled velocity predictions evaluated on the student’s current trajectory. At the same time, unlike RL-based approaches, D-OPSD does not require any external reward model or manually designed reward function. In this sense, D-OPSD combines the main advantage of online optimization, train-inference consistency, with the practicality of supervised learning from paired image-text data. 

Why this distinction matters for step-distilled models. For multi-step diffusion mod-els, moderate train-test mismatch can sometimes be tolerated because iterative denoising provides room for error correction [90, 32, 88, 48]. Step-distilled models are less forgiving: with only a few denoising steps, even small deviations in the learned dynamics can di-rectly harm image quality [111, 35]. For this reason, in our setting, it is important not only whether the training states are aligned with the model’s own sampling trajectory, but also whether the supervision signal is defined under that same trajectory. This is the main moti-vation behind the design in Table 3. Among the compared paradigms, D-OPSD is the only one that simultaneously satisfies four desirable properties for continual tuning of few-step models: it is on-policy, does not require a reward model, preserves train-inference consis-tency, and still incorporates target image-text pairs into training through self-distillation. 

## C Implementation Details. 

We now provide a detailed training and implementation settings of D-OPSD as follows: 

Encoder settings of student and teacher. During training, for the student model, we use the original text encoder of the diffusion model (for both Z-Image-Turbo, and FLUX.2-klein, text prompts are encoded using Qwen3-4B [107]). For the teacher model, since target image information must be incorporated, a straightforward solution is to replace Qwen3-4B with the corresponding Qwen3-VL-4B [2]. However, in practice, we find that this naive substitution introduces high-frequency artifacts and excessive sharpening in the generated 12 images (See Figure 8 the middle column). We attribute this issue to a mismatch of the feature space between inference and training distribution. 4w/ Qwen3-VL   

> target img w/ Qwen3-VL weight + LLM reweight

Figure 8: Comparison of generated images of Z-Image-Turbo conditioned on multimodal feature us-ing Qwen3-VL 4B and Qwen3-VL 4B with LLM part reweighted by Qwen3-4B LM. To address this issue, we re-place the weights of the LLM component in Qwen3-VL-4B with those from the more compati-ble Qwen3-4B, while keeping the ViT and Connector weights un-changed. In this way, we pre-serve multimodal in-context ca-pability while making the output distribution as consistent as pos-sible with that seen during diffu-sion model training (See Figure 8 the last column). Notably, this op-eration can be viewed as approx-imately reverting the the VLM to the stage where the Connector has been trained but the LLM param-eters remain unchanged [50, 99, 11]. Although the final VLM ex-hibits stronger multimodal capa-bilities, the model at this earlier stage still retains a certain de-gree of multimodal understand-ing. This reflects a trade-off between preserving the output image quality of the final dif-fusion model and maintaining the in-context capability provided by the VLM. As more LLMs/VLMs evolve toward native multimodal architectures [13, 22, 69], we expect this trade-off to be naturally alleviated in future diffusion models using stronger multimodal encoders, such as Qwen3.5 [69]. 

LoRA training on small customized dataset :• Z-Image-Turbo : We use LoRA with rank 64 and alpha 128 to finetune the model. We set the total batch size to 4 and the learning rate to 4e-5 5. The momentum coefficient of EMA decay is set to 0.9999 by default. (Note that since the model is trained with LoRA , we only need to use one main weight and then perform the EMA operation on the LoRA weights. This can effectively save the memory). The model is trained with 1K iterations on a single H800 GPU. • FLUX.2-klein : We also use LoRA with rank 64 and alpha 128 to finetune the model. We set the total batch size to 4 and the learning rate to 1e-5. The momentum coefficient of EMA decay is set to 0.9999 by default. The model is trained with 1K iterations on a single H800 GPU. 

Full finetuning on larger scale dataset :• Z-Image-Turbo : In this setup, we unlock all all the parameters in the diffusion trans-former backbone. We set the total batch size to 256 and the learning rate to 3e-5. The momentum coefficient of EMA decay is set to 0.9999 by default. The model is trained with 10k iterations on 32 H800 GPUs. • FLUX.2-klein : We also use LoRA with rank 64 and alpha 128 to finetune the model. We set the total batch size to 256 and the learning rate to 8e-6. The momentum coeffi-cient of EMA decay is set to 0.9999 by default. The model is trained with 10K iterations on 32 H800 GPUs. 

> 4Since Qwen3-VL is a continually trained variant of Qwen3-LM, the model can still drive image generation, but its output distribution no longer aligns well with that of the diffusion model’s original training setup.
> 5The learning rate for Z-Image-Turbo is consistently set higher than that for FLUX.2-klein because we find that the norm of the parameters in Z-Image-Turbo is greater than that other models include FLUX.2-klein. Con-sequently, a proportionally larger learning rate is required to maintain effective parameter updates during opti-mization.

13 D More Details of Evaluation 

We now provide the detailed evaluation protocols. 

LoRA training on small customized dataset. In this setting, we attempt to follow the community’s common secondary fine-tuning setup, where a concept is learned through LoRA training on the base model using only a small number of text–image pairs (e.g, less then 10). Thus, we adopt DreamBooth-style data [78] for both fine-tuning and evaluation. We use the following metric to evaluate the model: • DINO distance (DINO-D) : We first take the training captions of the training images and use the LLM to paraphrase the captions without changing their core semantics. These rewritten prompts are then used to generate images with the fine-tuned model. We compute the cosine distance between the DINO features of the generated images and those of the corresponding target images. For specific model, we use DINOv3-ViT-S-plus [85] as the feature extractor. • LPIPS distance (LPIPS-D) : Similar to DINO-D, we compute the LPIPS distance [115] between the generated images and the corresponding target images. For specific model, we adopt the commonly used VGG network [86] for this metric. • VLM’s judgment of subject or style consistency (VLM-J) : We fix the learned train-ing concept and ask the LLM to construct four groups of prompts that differ from the training prompts but still contain the same concept. For object concepts, the new prompts vary aspects such as scene and composition; for style concepts, the new prompts describe specific image contents different from those seen during training. We use these prompts to generate images with the fine-tuned model, and then feed the generated images together with the target image into the VLM, which is asked to assess the similarity of the concept and assign a score followed the rule of scoring: 4 points(basically the same); 3 points(relatively similar); 2 points (slightly similar); 1 point (completely different). For specific model, we use Qwen3-VL-8B-Instruct [2] for evaluation. • CLIP Score (CLIP-S) : Using the same images as in VLM-J, we further evaluate whether the model still follows the non-concept parts of the prompt, such as the back-ground. Specifically, we compute the image-text alignment between the generated image and the prompt using CLIP [70, 29]. Note that we replace the special Dream-Booth class token ([V]) with the original class name when computing this metric. For specific model, we use DFN-CLIP-H [18] for evaluation. • Quality Score (Quality-S) and Aesthetic Score (Aesthetic-S) : We use our internal VLM-based reward model for scoring. Compared with traditional open-source CLIP-based reward models, such as ImageReward [105] and PickScore [42], the model does not require the text prompt used for image generation as input, and provides more reliable scores thanks to large-scale training with dedicate human preference annota-tions and a reasoning process before giving final score during inference. 

Full finetuning on larger scale dataset : In this setting, we fully fine-tune the model like a normal large-scale SFT. Given that we use the latest state-of-the-art open-source mod-els [93, 4] as our baseline, most publicly available open-source datasets are unsuitable for our full finetuning experiment, as their overall quality is lower than that of the data used to train these baseline models. Therefore, we rely on an in-house dataset of 25K high-quality anime images. We use the following metric to evaluate the model: • Fréchet Inception Distance (FID) [30] : We randomly sample 2K data from training set, and use the fine-tuned model to generate the images from these prompts. the two set of images are then fed into the Inception-v3 network [92] to extract features. As-sumes both feature distributions are multivariate Gaussian and computes the Fr ´echet distance between them. • DINO distance (DINO-D) : The images generated for calculating FID score will also used to calculate DINO distance followed the rules used in the above LoRA evaluation settings. 14 • LPIPS distance (LPIPS-D) :Similar to DINO-D, the images generated for calculating FID score will also used to calculate LPIPS distance also followed the rules used in the above LoRA evaluation settings. • Quality Score (Quality-S) and Aesthetic Score (Aesthetic-S) : Similar to both DINO-D and LPIPS-D, the images generated for calculating FID score will also used to calculate Quality Score and Aesthetic Score from the Reward model we introduced above. • Geneval and DPG score : We follow the evaluation settings in these benchmarks [21, 34] to generate images and calculate score. Note that we use prompts from the original benchmark instead of the Prompt-Enhanced (PE) [97] variants for generating images. 

## E More Related Works 

We now provide a detailed literature review of other related work. 

Image generation diffusion models. Diffusion models have achieved remarkable success in image generation. Early works mainly study unconditional or class-conditional gener-ation, demonstrating that progressively denoising noise can produce highly realistic im-ages [16, 40]. This framework was then extended to text-to-image synthesis, where text conditions are injected into the denoising network to guide image generation according to natural language descriptions [74, 76]. Later, latent-space diffusion models and stronger text-conditioning designs further improve both efficiency and generation quality, making diffusion models the mainstream solution for text-to-image generation [66, 10, 76]. Build-ing on this, recent studies introduce more scalable backbones and objectives, such as diffu-sion transformers and flow/rectified-flow formulations, which continue to push the fron-tier of image fidelity, prompt following, and training scalability [65, 61, 10, 17, 3, 104]. Meanwhile, unlike earlier models that usually rely on CLIP [70] or T5 [73] as the condition encoder, the latest high-performance image generation models increasingly adopt large language models or vision-language models as the encoder [67, 93, 101, 4]. Our method is built upon this evolution: we show that the diffusion model can benefit from the in-context capability inherited from these modern encoders, which makes on-policy self-distillation feasible for continuously tuning step-distilled diffusion models. 

Knowledge distillation for diffusion model. Besides step-distillation for faster sampling, other forms of knowledge distillation [31, 24] is also widely used in diffusion models. Com-monly, a more powerful pretrained model is often used to guide the diffusion model dur-ing training [14, 113, 19, 102]. Meanwhile, self-distillation frameworks also demonstrates effectiveness even without external components (e.g, stronger model) [39, 98, 120, 8, 25]. For example, SRA [39] aligns the output latent representation of the diffusion transformer in earlier layer with higher noise to that in later layer with lower noise to progressively enhance the overall representation learning during only generative process and accelerate the training convergence of the model, which has also been demonstrated in subsequent study [8] to be applicable in multiple modalities (video, audio, etc.). Our work is also related to self-distillation, while our approach is conducted in an on-policy way for pre-serving few-step inference capacity during supervised fine-tuning. 

Diffusion model fine-tuning. A large body of work studies how to adapt pretrained dif-fusion models to new concepts, styles, or downstream domains [78, 109, 20, 45, 114, 47]. Representative approaches include standard supervised fine-tuning with all model pa-rameters, subject-driven customization methods such as DreamBooth [78], textual inver-sion [20], and parameter-efficient adaptation techniques such as LoRA [33]. Among them, full-parameter SFT remains a common choice when sufficient paired data are available, as it directly optimizes the full generative model on the target distribution. However, such standard fine-tuning paradigms are mainly developed for conventional multi-step diffu-sion models, and they do not explicitly consider whether the adapted model can preserve the few-step inference capability of a step-distilled generator. In particular, directly ap-plying the commonly used denoising or flow-matching objective during SFT would lead to degradation of their original fast-sampling behavior. In contrast, our work focuses on continuously tuning already distilled diffusion models and specifically targets preserving their native few-step generation ability during supervised adaptation. 15 References 

[1] Agarwal, R., Vieillard, N., Zhou, Y., Stanczyk, P., Garea, S.R., Geist, M., Bachem, O.: On-policy distillation of language models: Learning from self-generated mistakes. In: The twelfth international conference on learning representations (2024) [2] Bai, S., Cai, Y., Chen, R., Chen, K., Chen, X., Cheng, Z., Deng, L., Ding, W., Gao, C., Ge, C., et al.: Qwen3-vl technical report. arXiv preprint arXiv:2511.21631 (2025) [3] Black Forest Labs: FLUX. https://github.com/black-forest-labs/flux 

(2023) [4] Black Forest Labs: FLUX.2: Frontier Visual Intelligence. https://bfl.ai/blog/ flux-2 (2025) [5] Brown, T., Mann, B., Ryder, N., Subbiah, M., Kaplan, J.D., Dhariwal, P., Neelakantan, A., Shyam, P., Sastry, G., Askell, A., et al.: Language models are few-shot learners. Advances in neural information processing systems 33 , 1877–1901 (2020) [6] Cao, S., Chen, H., Chen, P., Cheng, Y., Cui, Y., Deng, X., Dong, Y., Gong, K., Gu, T., Gu, X., et al.: Hunyuanimage 3.0 technical report. arXiv preprint arXiv:2509.23951 (2025) [7] Caron, M., Touvron, H., Misra, I., Jégou, H., Mairal, J., Bojanowski, P., Joulin, A.: Emerging properties in self-supervised vision transformers. In: Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF international conference on computer vision. pp. 9650–9660 (2021) [8] Chefer, H., Esser, P., Lorenz, D., Podell, D., Raja, V., Tong, V., Torralba, A., Rombach, R.: Self-supervised flow matching for scalable multi-modal synthesis. arXiv preprint arXiv:2603.06507 (2026) [9] Chen, H., Zhang, K., Tan, H., Guibas, L., Wetzstein, G., Bi, S.: pi-flow: Policy-based few-step generation via imitation distillation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2510.14974 (2025) [10] Chen, J., Yu, J., Ge, C., Yao, L., Xie, E., Wu, Y., Wang, Z., Kwok, J., Luo, P., Lu, H., Li, Z.: Pixart-𝛼 : Fast training of diffusion transformer for photorealistic text-to-image synthesis. In: International Conference on Learning Representations (2024) [11] Chen, Z., Wang, W., Tian, H., Ye, S., Gao, Z., Cui, E., Tong, W., Hu, K., Luo, J., Ma, Z., et al.: How far are we to gpt-4v? closing the gap to commercial multimodal models with open-source suites. Science China Information Sciences 67 (12), 220101 (2024) [12] Cheng, Z., Sun, P., Li, J., Lin, T.: Twinflow: Realizing one-step generation on large models with self-adversarial flows. arXiv preprint arXiv:2512.05150 (2025) [13] Comanici, G., Bieber, E., Schaekermann, M., Pasupat, I., Sachdeva, N., Dhillon, I., Blistein, M., Ram, O., Zhang, D., Rosen, E., et al.: Gemini 2.5: Pushing the frontier with advanced reasoning, multimodality, long context, and next generation agentic capabilities. arXiv preprint arXiv:2507.06261 (2025) [14] Daniel Verdú, J.M.: Flux.1 lite: Distilling flux1.dev for efficient text-to-image genera-tion. https://huggingface.co/Freepik (2024) [15] DeepSeek-AI: Deepseek-v4: Towards highly efficient million-token context intelli-gence (2026) [16] Dhariwal, P., Nichol, A.: Diffusion models beat gans on image synthesis. Advances in neural information processing systems 34 , 8780–8794 (2021) [17] Esser, P., Kulal, S., Blattmann, A., Entezari, R., Muller, J., Saini, H., Levi, Y., Lorenz, D., Sauer, A., Boesel, F., Podell, D., Dockhorn, T., English, Z., Lacey, K., Goodwin, A., Marek, Y., Rombach, R.: Scaling rectified flow transformers for high-resolution image synthesis. In: Forty-first international conference on machine learning (2024) 16 [18] Fang, A., Jose, A.M., Jain, A., Schmidt, L., Toshev, A., Shankar, V.: Data filtering networks. arXiv preprint arXiv:2309.17425 (2023) [19] Fang, G., Li, K., Ma, X., Wang, X.: Tinyfusion: Diffusion transformers learned shal-low. arXiv preprint arXiv:2412.01199 (2024) [20] Gal, R., Alaluf, Y., Atzmon, Y., Patashnik, O., Bermano, A.H., Chechik, G., Cohen-Or, D.: An image is worth one word: Personalizing text-to-image generation using textual inversion. arXiv preprint arXiv:2208.01618 (2022) [21] Ghosh, D., Hajishirzi, H., Schmidt, L.: Geneval: An object-focused framework for evaluating text-to-image alignment. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 36 , 52132–52152 (2023) [22] Google DeepMind: Gemini 3. https://deepmind.google/models/gemini/ 

(2025) [23] Google DeepMind: Gemini 3 pro image model card. https: //storage.googleapis.com/deepmind-media/Model-Cards/ Gemini-3-Pro-Image-Model-Card.pdf (2025) [24] Gou, J., Yu, B., Maybank, S.J., Tao, D.: Knowledge distillation: A survey. International Journal of Computer Vision 129 (6), 1789–1819 (2021) [25] Goyal, S., Agrawal, S., Anil, G.G., Jain, P., Paul, S., Kusupati, A.: Elt: Elastic looped transformers for visual generation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2604.09168 (2026) [26] Gu, N., Yang, C., Si, Q., Qin, C., Yao, D., Fu, P., Lin, Z., Wang, W., Duan, N., Wang, J.: Co-evolving policy distillation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2604.27083 (2026) [27] HaCohen, Y., Brazowski, B., Chiprut, N., Bitterman, Y., Kvochko, A., Berkowitz, A., Shalem, D., Lifschitz, D., Moshe, D., Porat, E., et al.: Ltx-2: Efficient joint audio-visual foundation model. arXiv preprint arXiv:2601.03233 (2026) [28] He, Y., Kaur, S., Bhaskar, A., Yang, Y., Liu, J., Ri, N., Fowl, L., Panigrahi, A., Chen, D., Arora, S.: Self-distillation zero: Self-revision turns binary rewards into dense supervision. arXiv preprint arXiv:2604.12002 (2026) [29] Hessel, J., Holtzman, A., Forbes, M., Bras, R.L., Choi, Y.: Clipscore: A reference-free evaluation metric for image captioning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2104.08718 (2021) [30] Heusel, M., Ramsauer, H., Unterthiner, T., Nessler, B., Hochreiter, S.: Gans trained by a two time-scale update rule converge to a local nash equilibrium. Advances in neural information processing systems 30 (2017) [31] Hinton, G., Vinyals, O., Dean, J.: Distilling the knowledge in a neural network. arXiv preprint arXiv:1503.02531 (2015) [32] Ho, J., Jain, A., Abbeel, P.: Denoising diffusion probabilistic models. Advances in neural information processing systems 33 , 6840–6851 (2020) [33] Hu, E.J., Shen, Y., Wallis, P., Allen-Zhu, Z., Li, Y., Wang, S., Wang, L., Chen, W., et al.: Lora: Low-rank adaptation of large language models. ICLR 1(2), 3 (2022) [34] Hu, X., Wang, R., Fang, Y., Fu, B., Cheng, P., Yu, G.: Ella: Equip diffusion models with llm for enhanced semantic alignment. arXiv preprint arXiv:2403.05135 (2024) [35] Huang, X., Li, Z., He, G., Zhou, M., Shechtman, E.: Self forcing: Bridging the train-test gap in autoregressive video diffusion. arXiv preprint arXiv:2506.08009 (2025) [36] Hunter, J.S.: The exponentially weighted moving average. Journal of quality technol-ogy 18 (4), 203–210 (1986) [37] Jang, I., Yeom, J., Yeo, J., Lim, H., Kim, T.: Stable on-policy distillation through adap-tive target reformulation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2601.07155 (2026) 17 [38] Jiang, D., Liu, D., Wang, Z., Wu, Q., Li, L., Li, H., Jin, X., Liu, D., Li, Z., Zhang, B., et al.: Distribution matching distillation meets reinforcement learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2511.13649 (2025) [39] Jiang, D., Wang, M., Li, L., Zhang, L., Wang, H., Wei, W., Dai, G., Zhang, Y., Wang, J.: No other representation component is needed: Diffusion transformers can provide representation guidance by themselves. arXiv preprint arXiv:2505.02831 (2025) [40] Karras, T., Aittala, M., Lehtinen, J., Hellsten, J., Aila, T., Laine, S.: Analyzing and im-proving the training dynamics of diffusion models. In: Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition. pp. 24174–24184 (2024) [41] Kelseye, Duan, Z.: Training strategies of z-image-turbo. https://huggingface. co/blog/kelseye/training-strategies-of-z-image-turbo (2025) [42] Kirstain, Y., Polyak, A., Singer, U., Matiana, S., Penna, J., Levy, O.: Pick-a-pic: An open dataset of user preferences for text-to-image generation. Advances in neural information processing systems 36 , 36652–36663 (2023) [43] Kulikov, V., Kleiner, M., Huberman-Spiegelglas, I., Michaeli, T.: Flowedit: Inversion-free text-based editing using pre-trained flow models. In: Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer Vision. pp. 19721–19730 (2025) [44] Kullback, S., Leibler, R.A.: On information and sufficiency. The annals of mathemat-ical statistics 22 (1), 79–86 (1951) [45] Kumari, N., Zhang, B., Zhang, R., Shechtman, E., Zhu, J.Y.: Multi-concept customiza-tion of text-to-image diffusion. In: Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF conference on com-puter vision and pattern recognition. pp. 1931–1941 (2023) [46] Labs, B.F., Batifol, S., Blattmann, A., Boesel, F., Consul, S., Diagne, C., Dockhorn, T., English, J., English, Z., Esser, P., et al.: Flux. 1 kontext: Flow matching for in-context image generation and editing in latent space. arXiv preprint arXiv:2506.15742 (2025) [47] Li, L., Gong, Y., Liu, S., Cheng, B., Ma, Y., Wu, L., Jiang, D., Wang, Z., Leng, D., Yin, Y.: Refvton: person-to-person try on with additional unpaired visual reference. arXiv preprint arXiv:2511.00956 (2025) [48] Lipman, Y., Chen, R.T., Ben-Hamu, H., Nickel, M., Le, M.: Flow matching for gener-ative modeling. arXiv preprint arXiv:2210.02747 (2022) [49] Liu, D., Gao, P., Liu, D., Du, R., Li, Z., Wu, Q., Jin, X., Cao, S., Zhang, S., Li, H., Hoi, S.: Decoupled dmd: Cfg augmentation as the spear, distribution matching as the shield. arXiv preprint arXiv:2511.22677 (2025) [50] Liu, H., Li, C., Wu, Q., Lee, Y.J.: Visual instruction tuning. Advances in neural infor-mation processing systems 36 , 34892–34916 (2023) [51] Liu, J., Liu, G., Liang, J., Li, Y., Liu, J., Wang, X., Wan, P., Zhang, D., Ouyang, W.: Flow-grpo: Training flow matching models via online rl. arXiv preprint arXiv:2505.05470 (2025) [52] Liu, X., Gong, C., Liu, Q.: Flow straight and fast: Learning to generate and transfer data with rectified flow. arXiv preprint arXiv:2209.03003 (2022) [53] Lu, K., Lab, T.M.: On-policy distillation. Thinking Machines Lab: Connectionism (2025). https://doi.org/10.64434/tml.20251026, https://thinkingmachines.ai/blog/on-policy-distillation [54] Lu, Y., Ren, Y., Xia, X., Lin, S., Wang, X., Xiao, X., Ma, A.J., Xie, X., Lai, J.H.: Adversar-ial distribution matching for diffusion distillation towards efficient image and video synthesis. arXiv preprint arXiv:2507.18569 (2025) [55] Luhman, E., Luhman, T.: Knowledge distillation in iterative generative models for improved sampling speed. arXiv preprint arXiv:2101.02388 (2021) 18 [56] Luo, S., Tan, Y., Huang, L., Li, J., Zhao, H.: Latent consistency models: Synthesiz-ing high-resolution images with few-step inference. arXiv preprint arXiv:2310.04378 (2023) [57] Luo, W.: Diff-instruct++: Training one-step text-to-image generator model to align with human preferences. arXiv preprint arXiv:2410.18881 (2024) [58] Luo, W., Hu, T., Zhang, S., Sun, J., Li, Z., Zhang, Z.: Diff-instruct: A universal ap-proach for transferring knowledge from pre-trained diffusion models. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 36 , 76525–76546 (2023) [59] Luo, Y., Hu, T., Luo, W., Tang, J.: Tdm-r1: Reinforcing few-step diffusion models with non-differentiable reward. arXiv preprint arXiv:2603.07700 (2026) [60] Luo, Y., Hu, T., Sun, J., Cai, Y., Tang, J.: Learning few-step diffusion models by trajec-tory distribution matching. arXiv preprint arXiv:2503.06674 (2025) [61] Ma, N., Goldstein, M., Albergo, M.S., Boffi, N.M., Vanden-Eijnden, E., Xie, S.: Sit: Ex-ploring flow and diffusion-based generative models with scalable interpolant trans-formers. In: European Conference on Computer Vision. pp. 23–40. Springer (2024) [62] Miao, Z., Yang, Z., Lin, K., Wang, Z., Liu, Z., Wang, L., Qiu, Q.: Tun-ing timestep-distilled diffusion model using pairwise sample optimization. arXiv preprint arXiv:2410.03190 (2024) [63] OpenAI: Gpt-Image-1. https://openai.com/index/ introducing-4o-image-generation/ (2025) [64] Ostris: Z-image-de-turbo. https://huggingface.co/ostris/ Z-Image-De-Turbo (2025) [65] Peebles, W., Xie, S.: Scalable diffusion models with transformers. In: Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF international conference on computer vision. pp. 4195–4205 (2023) [66] Podell, D., English, Z., Lacey, K., Blattmann, A., Dockhorn, T., Müller, J., Penna, J., Rombach, R.: Sdxl: Improving latent diffusion models for high-resolution image synthesis. arXiv preprint arXiv:2307.01952 (2023) [67] Qin, Q., Zhuo, L., Xin, Y., Du, R., Li, Z., Fu, B., Lu, Y., Li, X., Liu, D., Zhu, X., et al.: Lumina-image 2.0: A unified and efficient image generative framework. In: Pro-ceedings of the IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer Vision. pp. 20031– 20042 (2025) [68] Qin, Y., Wang, L., Fei, H., Zimmermann, R., Bo, L., Lu, Q., Wang, C.: Soar: Self-correction for optimal alignment and refinement in diffusion models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2604.12617 (2026) [69] Qwen Team: Qwen3.5: Towards native multimodal agents. https://qwen.ai/ blog?id=qwen3.5 (2026) [70] Radford, A., Kim, J.W., Hallacy, C., Ramesh, A., Goh, G., Agarwal, S., Sastry, G., Askell, A., Mishkin, P., Clark, J., Krueger, G., Sutskever, I.: Learning transferable visual models from natural language supervision. In: International conference on machine learning. pp. 8748–8763. PMLR (2021) [71] Radford, A., Narasimhan, K., Salimans, T., Sutskever, I., et al.: Improving language understanding by generative pre-training (2018) [72] Radford, A., Wu, J., Child, R., Luan, D., Amodei, D., Sutskever, I., et al.: Language models are unsupervised multitask learners. OpenAI blog 1(8), 9 (2019) [73] Raffel, C., Shazeer, N., Roberts, A., Lee, K., Narang, S., Matena, M., Zhou, Y., Li, W., Liu, P.J.: Exploring the limits of transfer learning with a unified text-to-text trans-former. Journal of machine learning research 21 (140), 1–67 (2020) 19 [74] Ramesh, A., Dhariwal, P., Nichol, A., Chu, C., Chen, M.: Hierarchical text-conditional image generation with clip latents. arXiv preprint arXiv:2204.06125 1(2), 3 (2022) [75] Ren, Y., Xia, X., Lu, Y., Zhang, J., Wu, J., Xie, P., Wang, X., Xiao, X.: Hyper-sd: Tra-jectory segmented consistency model for efficient image synthesis. arXiv preprint arXiv:2404.13686 (2024) [76] Rombach, R., Blattmann, A., Lorenz, D., Esser, P., Ommer, B.: High-resolution image synthesis with latent diffusion models. In: Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF conference on computer vision and pattern recognition. pp. 10684–10695 (2022) [77] r/StableDiffusion, the Reddit Community: Z-image lora training. https: //www.reddit.com/r/StableDiffusion/comments/1pj0469/zimage_lora_ training/ (2025) [78] Ruiz, N., Li, Y., Jampani, V., Pritch, Y., Rubinstein, M., Aberman, K.: Dreambooth: Fine tuning text-to-image diffusion models for subject-driven generation. In: Pro-ceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (2023) [79] Sang, H., Xu, Y., Zhou, Z., He, R., Wang, Z., Sun, J.: On-policy self-distillation for reasoning compression. arXiv preprint arXiv:2603.05433 (2026) [80] Sauer, A., Boesel, F., Dockhorn, T., Blattmann, A., Esser, P., Rombach, R.: Fast high-resolution image synthesis with latent adversarial diffusion distillation. In: SIG-GRAPH Asia 2024 Conference Papers. pp. 1–11 (2024) [81] Sauer, A., Lorenz, D., Blattmann, A., Rombach, R.: Adversarial diffusion distillation. In: European Conference on Computer Vision. pp. 87–103. Springer (2024) [82] Seedance, T., Chen, D., Chen, L., Chen, X., Chen, Y., Chen, Z., Chen, Z., Cheng, F., Cheng, T., Cheng, Y., et al.: Seedance 2.0: Advancing video generation for world complexity. arXiv preprint arXiv:2604.14148 (2026) [83] Seedream, T., Chen, Y., Gao, Y., Gong, L., Guo, M., Guo, Q., Guo, Z., Hou, X., Huang, W., Huang, Y., et al.: Seedream 4.0: Toward next-generation multimodal image gen-eration. arXiv preprint arXiv:2509.20427 (2025) [84] Shenfeld, I., Damani, M., Hübotter, J., Agrawal, P.: Self-distillation enables continual learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2601.19897 (2026) [85] Siméoni, O., Vo, H.V., Seitzer, M., Baldassarre, F., Oquab, M., Jose, C., Khali-dov, V., Szafraniec, M., Yi, S., Ramamonjisoa, M., et al.: Dinov3. arXiv preprint arXiv:2508.10104 (2025) [86] Simonyan, K., Zisserman, A.: Very deep convolutional networks for large-scale im-age recognition. arXiv preprint arXiv:1409.1556 (2014) [87] Somepalli, G., Somepalli, S.: Latent scaffolding image generation models. https://somepago.github.io/posts/latent-scaffolding-series/ (2026) [88] Song, J., Meng, C., Ermon, S.: Denoising diffusion implicit models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2010.02502 (2020) [89] Song, M., Zheng, M.: A survey of on-policy distillation for large language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2604.00626 (2026) [90] Song, Y., Sohl-Dickstein, J., Kingma, D.P., Kumar, A., Ermon, S., Poole, B.: Score-based generative modeling through stochastic differential equations. arXiv preprint arXiv:2011.13456 (2020) [91] Sutskever, I., Vinyals, O., Le, Q.V.: Sequence to sequence learning with neural net-works. Advances in neural information processing systems 27 (2014) 20 [92] Szegedy, C., Vanhoucke, V., Ioffe, S., Shlens, J., Wojna, Z.: Rethinking the inception architecture for computer vision. In: Proceedings of the IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern recognition. pp. 2818–2826 (2016) [93] Team, Z.I., Cai, H., Cao, S., Du, R., Gao, P., Hoi, S., Hou, Z., Huang, S., Jiang, D., Jin, X., Li, L., Li, Z., Li, Z.Y., Liu, D., Liu, D., Shi, J., Wu, Q., Yu, F., Zhang, C., Zhang, S., Zhou, S.: Z-image: An efficient image generation foundation model with single-stream diffusion transformer. arXiv preprint arXiv:2511.22699 (2025) [94] Touvron, H., Lavril, T., Izacard, G., Martinet, X., Lachaux, M.A., Lacroix, T., Rozière, B., Goyal, N., Hambro, E., Azhar, F., et al.: Llama: Open and efficient foundation language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2302.13971 (2023) [95] Wallace, B., Dang, M., Rafailov, R., Zhou, L., Lou, A., Purushwalkam, S., Ermon, S., Xiong, C., Joty, S., Naik, N.: Diffusion model alignment using direct preference optimization. In: Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition. pp. 8228–8238 (2024) [96] Wan, T., Wang, A., Ai, B., Wen, B., Mao, C., Xie, C.W., Chen, D., Yu, F., Zhao, H., Yang, J., et al.: Wan: Open and advanced large-scale video generative models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2503.20314 (2025) [97] Wang, L., Xing, X., Cheng, Y., Zhao, Z., Li, D., Hang, T., Tao, J., Wang, Q., Li, R., Chen, C., et al.: Promptenhancer: A simple approach to enhance text-to-image models via chain-of-thought prompt rewriting. arXiv preprint arXiv:2509.04545 (2025) [98] Wang, M., Jiang, D., Li, L., Lin, Y., Shen, G., Kong, X., Liu, Y., Dai, G., Wang, J.: Vae-repa: Variational autoencoder representation alignment for efficient diffusion training. arXiv preprint arXiv:2601.17830 (2026) [99] Wang, P., Bai, S., Tan, S., Wang, S., Fan, Z., Bai, J., Chen, K., Liu, X., Wang, J., Ge, W., et al.: Qwen2-vl: Enhancing vision-language model’s perception of the world at any resolution. arXiv preprint arXiv:2409.12191 (2024) [100] Wei, J., Wang, X., Schuurmans, D., Bosma, M., Xia, F., Chi, E., Le, Q.V., Zhou, D., et al.: Chain-of-thought prompting elicits reasoning in large language models. Advances in neural information processing systems 35 , 24824–24837 (2022) [101] Wu, C., Li, J., Zhou, J., Lin, J., Gao, K., Yan, K., Yin, S.m., Bai, S., Xu, X., Chen, Y., et al.: Qwen-image technical report. arXiv preprint arXiv:2508.02324 (2025) [102] Wu, G., Zhang, S., Shi, R., Gao, S., Chen, Z., Wang, L., Chen, Z., Gao, H., Tang, Y., Yang, J., et al.: Representation entanglement for generation: Training diffusion transformers is much easier than you think. arXiv preprint arXiv:2507.01467 (2025) [103] Wu, X., Hao, Y., Sun, K., Chen, Y., Zhu, F., Zhao, R., Li, H.: Human preference score v2: A solid benchmark for evaluating human preferences of text-to-image synthesis. arXiv preprint arXiv:2306.09341 (2023) [104] Xie, E., Chen, J., Chen, J., Cai, H., Tang, H., Lin, Y., Zhang, Z., Li, M., Zhu, L., Lu, Y., et al.: Sana: Efficient high-resolution image synthesis with linear diffusion trans-formers. arXiv preprint arXiv:2410.10629 (2024) [105] Xu, J., Liu, X., Wu, Y., Tong, Y., Li, Q., Ding, M., Tang, J., Dong, Y.: Imagereward: Learning and evaluating human preferences for text-to-image generation. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 36 , 15903–15935 (2023) [106] Xue, Z., Wu, J., Gao, Y., Kong, F., Zhu, L., Chen, M., Liu, Z., Liu, W., Guo, Q., Huang, W., et al.: Dancegrpo: Unleashing grpo on visual generation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2505.07818 (2025) [107] Yang, A., Li, A., Yang, B., Zhang, B., Hui, B., Zheng, B., Yu, B., Gao, C., Huang, C., Lv, C., et al.: Qwen3 technical report. arXiv preprint arXiv:2505.09388 (2025) 21 [108] Yang, C., Qin, C., Si, Q., Chen, M., Gu, N., Yao, D., Lin, Z., Wang, W., Wang, J., Duan, N.: Self-distilled rlvr. arXiv preprint arXiv:2604.03128 (2026) [109] Ye, H., Zhang, J., Liu, S., Han, X., Yang, W.: Ip-adapter: Text compatible image prompt adapter for text-to-image diffusion models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2308.06721 (2023) [110] Ye, T., Dong, L., Wu, X., Huang, S., Wei, F.: On-policy context distillation for language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2602.12275 (2026) [111] Yin, T., Gharbi, M., Park, T., Zhang, R., Shechtman, E., Durand, F., Freeman, B.: Im-proved distribution matching distillation for fast image synthesis. Advances in neu-ral information processing systems 37 , 47455–47487 (2024) [112] Yin, T., Gharbi, M., Zhang, R., Shechtman, E., Durand, F., Freeman, W.T., Park, T.: One-step diffusion with distribution matching distillation. In: Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF conference on computer vision and pattern recognition. pp. 6613–6623 (2024) [113] Yu, S., Kwak, S., Jang, H., Jeong, J., Huang, J., Shin, J., Xie, S.: Representation align-ment for generation: Training diffusion transformers is easier than you think. In: International Conference on Learning Representations (2025) [114] Zhang, L., Rao, A., Agrawala, M.: Adding conditional control to text-to-image diffu-sion models. In: Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF international conference on computer vision. pp. 3836–3847 (2023) [115] Zhang, R., Isola, P., Efros, A.A., Shechtman, E., Wang, O.: The unreasonable effective-ness of deep features as a perceptual metric. In: Proceedings of the IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern recognition. pp. 586–595 (2018) [116] Zhao, S., Xie, Z., Liu, M., Huang, J., Pang, G., Chen, F., Grover, A.: Self-distilled reasoner: On-policy self-distillation for large language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2601.18734 (2026) [117] Zheng, K., Chen, H., Ye, H., Wang, H., Zhang, Q., Jiang, K., Su, H., Ermon, S., Zhu, J., Liu, M.Y.: Diffusionnft: Online diffusion reinforcement with forward process. arXiv preprint arXiv:2509.16117 (2025) [118] Zheng, K., Wang, Y., Ma, Q., Chen, H., Zhang, J., Balaji, Y., Chen, J., Liu, M.Y., Zhu, J., Zhang, Q.: Large scale diffusion distillation via score-regularized continuous-time consistency. arXiv preprint arXiv:2510.08431 (2025) [119] Zhou, J., Wei, C., Wang, H., Shen, W., Xie, C., Yuille, A., Kong, T.: ibot: Image bert pre-training with online tokenizer. In: International Conference on Learning Repre-sentations (2022) [120] Zhu, R., Pan, Y., Li, Y., Yao, T., Sun, Z., Mei, T., Chen, C.W.: Sd-dit: Unleashing the power of self-supervised discrimination in diffusion transformer. In: Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition. pp. 8435– 8445 (2024) 22