Title: Benchmarking Vision-Language Models under Contradictory Virtual Content Attacks in Augmented Reality

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2604.05510v1

Published Time: Wed, 08 Apr 2026 00:45:24 GMT

Number of Pages: 10

Markdown Content:
# Benchmarking Vision-Language Models under Contradictory Virtual Content Attacks in Augmented Reality 

# Yanming Xiu, Zhengayuan Jiang, Neil Zhenqiang Gong, Maria Gorlatova Duke University 

{yanming.xiu, zhengyuan.jiang, neil.gong, maria.gorlatova }@duke.edu 

# Abstract 

Augmented reality (AR) has rapidly expanded over the past decade. As AR becomes increasingly integrated into daily life, its security and reliability emerge as critical chal-lenges. Among various threats, contradictory virtual con-tent attacks, where malicious or inconsistent virtual ele-ments are introduced into the user’s view, pose a unique risk by misleading users, creating semantic confusion, or delivering harmful information. In this work, we system-atically model such attacks and present ContrAR, a novel benchmark for evaluating the robustness of vision-language models (VLMs) against virtual content manipulation and contradiction in AR. ContrAR contains 312 real-world AR videos validated by 10 human participants. We further benchmark 11 VLMs, including both commercial and open-source models. Experimental results reveal that while cur-rent VLMs exhibit reasonable understanding of contradic-tory virtual content, room still remains for improvement in detecting and reasoning about adversarial content manipu-lations in AR environments. Moreover, balancing detection accuracy and latency remains challenging. 

# 1. Introduction 

Augmented Reality (AR) overlays digital information onto the physical world, providing users with additional infor-mation and enabling users’ intuitive interactions with sur-rounding environments. Modern AR experiences often integrate virtual content from multiple sources, such as the system UI and different commercial applications. As AR ecosystems grow increasingly open and interconnected, these virtual elements may either unintentionally or mali-ciously introduce visual attacks[9, 22, 33, 37, 42, 43] in AR scenes. One of the major concerns is the contradic-tion attack[19, 29] caused by virtual content in AR scenes, where virtual content present inconsistent or conflicting se-mantics within the same scene. For example, in Fig. 1, the contradictory virtual content can potentially lead users to incorrect destinations or raise property safety concerns. 

Figure 1. Examples of contradictory virtual content in augmented reality. (a) The text instruction “Restroom is on the right” con-flicts with the directional arrow pointing left; (b) The virtual icon indicates that the car door is unlocked, while the text instruction claims “The door has been locked!”. 

While such contradictory virtual content can lead to neg-ative user experience and consequences, detecting them is challenging because it requires semantic-level reasoning be-yond low-level feature analysis. The system must not only recognize the virtual content and their attributes, but also in-fer relationships, consistency, and intent among coexisting virtual contents. Previous efforts on virtual content analysis in AR have primarily focused on quality assessment, such as analyzing alignment accuracy, lighting consistency, or perceptual realism, without modeling high-level semantic consistency among virtual objects. These approaches can quantify rendering or placement quality but fail to capture when virtual elements convey conflicting meanings. Conversely, a rich body of work on semantic reason-ing, spanning visual question answering, scene understand-ing, and multimodal reasoning, has demonstrated impres-sive progress in general computer-vision contexts. Recent advances in vision-language models (VLMs) have demon-strated remarkable performance on a wide range of seman-tic reasoning tasks that combine visual perception and lin-guistic understanding. Models such as GPT [28], Gem-ini [15] and Grok [39] can perform multimodal question an-swering, captioning, and reasoning about object relations. These capabilities make VLMs promising candidates for understanding and detecting semantic contradictions in AR scenes, where both visual and textual information coexist and interact. However, the methods and models are usually 

> arXiv:2604.05510v1 [cs.CV] 7 Apr 2026

tested outside the AR setting, so it remains unclear whether they can still robustly interpret or detect semantic contra-dictions in complex, mixed-reality scenes. Motivated by this observation, we aim to systematically study contradictory virtual content attacks in AR and eval-uate the capability of modern VLMs to recognize such se-mantic conflicts. To this end, we propose ContrAR, a new benchmark that models this type of adversarial manipu-lation and provides a standardized dataset for evaluating VLM performance under contradictory virtual content at-tacks. ContrAR is built from real-world AR scenes and in-cludes human validation to ensure label annotation quality. Our main contributions are as follows: • We formally define the contradictory virtual content at-tack through a threat model tailored to commercial AR systems. The model specifies the attacker’s purpose, knowledge, and capabilities under realistic constraints, as well as the attack detection system’s accessible informa-tion and operational limits. Our threat model provides a foundation for analyzing semantic-level AR threats. • We propose ContrAR , the first benchmark dataset that systematically represents contradictory virtual content at-tacks in AR, containing 312 real-world AR videos col-lected by a commercial head-mounted device (HMD), Meta Quest 3. The labels of the videos are validated by 10 human subjects. The dataset is available on GitHub. 1

• We benchmark 11 VLMs, including commercial mod-els and open-source models, and analyze their strengths and weaknesses in detecting semantic contradictions in AR content. Our findings reveal that while these models demonstrate a reasonable understanding of contradictory virtual content in AR, their performance still leaves sig-nificant room for improvement, and achieving a balance between accuracy and latency remains an open challenge. The remainder of this paper is organized as follows: Sec. 2 reviews prior work related to contradictory content attack, virtual content analysis, and AR scene understand-ing. Sec. 3 defines the threat model and attacker assump-tions that guide our benchmark design. Sec. 4 introduces the construction and annotation of the proposed ContrAR dataset, while Sec. 5 presents the experiment setup, reports the results, and provides analysis on model performance and latency trade-offs. Finally, Sec. 6 discusses the limitations and future directions, and Sec. 7 concludes the paper. 

# 2. Related Work 

2.1. Contradictory Content Attack 

Semantically contradictory information has long been rec-ognized as a safety and reliability concern in natural language understanding and human-computer interaction. Early work on contradiction detection in text defined 

> 1https://github.com/YM-Xiu/ContrAR-Dataset

types of contradictory statements and developed corpora for sentence-pair inference[10]. Recent work, such as BoardgameQA[19], introduces textual benchmarks that test models’ reasoning over contradictory information in lan-guage, demonstrating that large models still perform incon-sistently when evidence conflicts. Pan et al. [29] studied the effect of injecting contradictory misinformation into open-domain QA corpora and found that current models are vul-nerable to small amounts of semantic conflict in retrieved evidence. However, these efforts remain confined to the text domain and do not extend to visual or multimodal contexts. In computer vision research, exploration of semantic contradictions mainly focuses on the semantic information in images. Pedziwiatr et al. [31] examined how semantic contradictions between objects and scenes influence visual attention, showing that contradictory objects attract more fixations but are perceived as less meaningful. More re-cently, multimodal benchmarks such as MMIR[44] have be-gun investigating visual-textual inconsistencies in layout-rich documents and presentations. However, most exist-ing related work remains limited to still-image inconsisten-cies and thus does not address the unique challenges posed by the dynamic mixed-reality environments, where multi-ple virtual elements must be interpreted in the context of the real world continuously. Also, previous visual inconsis-tency studies mainly focus on anomaly detection in natural images or UI interfaces, rather than purposefully contradic-tory virtual content embedded in AR scenes. This gap moti-vates our definition of contradictory virtual content attacks in AR and the creation of the ContrAR benchmark to sys-tematically evaluate them. 

2.2. Virtual Content Analysis in AR 

Assessing and regulating the quality of virtual content has long been an important topic in AR research. A significant amount of work focuses on virtual content quality assess-ment, which primarily focuses on low-level visual or spatial metrics such as rendering fidelity, lighting realism, depth alignment, or registration accuracy [2, 6, 12, 13, 18, 21, 24, 38]. These approaches ensure geometric or perceptual coherence but lack awareness of the semantic-level infor-mation conveyed by the virtual elements and their relation-ships within the AR scene. As a result, they cannot evaluate whether virtual content delivers meaningful, consistent, and trustworthy meanings to the user. Another related direction is AR scene understanding, which seeks to interpret the semantic structure of the AR en-vironment, including object recognition, depth estimation, and spatial reasoning, which has been applied in fields such as robotics [34], surgery [30], and assembly [16]. More recently, several studies have applied generative AI mod-els, especially VLMs, to enhance semantic reasoning in AR tasks, including virtual content description [14] and virtual object placement [32, 35]. While these works ad-vance a holistic understanding of AR environments, they are developed under benign conditions and do not consider adversarial or malicious content. Some work has further extended the application of VLMs to AR safety research toward identifying and mitigating detrimental or adversar-ial virtual content, such as obstruction detection [43], vi-sual information manipulation detection [41], privacy pro-tection [8], and user cognition protection [7]. These systems demonstrate that multimodal reasoning can support high-level interpretation of AR scenes and improve safety aware-ness. However, all of them provide system-level solutions tailored to applications rather than a unified benchmark for model evaluation. In our work, we aim to propose a stan-dardized benchmark that isolates the semantic contradiction aspect of AR content and enables reproducible evaluation of VLM reasoning under adversarial conditions. 

# 3. Threat Model 

We start our work by establishing a clear threat model, which defines the basic assumptions, the attacker’s pur-poses, knowledge, and capabilities, as well as the capabili-ties of the attack detection system. This model serves as the conceptual foundation for understanding contradictory vir-tual content attacks in AR and for designing the subsequent benchmark and evaluation. 

3.1. Basic Assumptions 

We consider an AR environment deployed on an HMD. The device hardware, including the camera and spatial tracking sensors, is assumed to function correctly and to provide au-thentic data. The operating system (OS) and compositor are trusted and are responsible for isolating user-level applica-tions and correctly compositing their outputs. Applications are sandboxed and cannot gain unauthorized access to the memory or internal states of other apps. Cloud-based ser-vices, such as semantic reasoning, are also considered trust-worthy, and all communication with them is assumed to be encrypted and uncompromised. The user is benign and in-teracts with the AR system in good faith. Under these as-sumptions, any security risk arises from malicious or mis-leading virtual content generated at the application level, rather than from hardware or system compromise. 

3.2. Attacker Purpose 

The attacker seeks to manipulate the semantics of virtual content shown to the user rather than to directly disrupt sys-tem operation. The primary objectives include: (1) mislead-ing the user by displaying virtual elements that convey con-flicting or false information (e.g., presenting contradictory navigation cues that lead a user to the wrong destination, thereby reducing task efficiency and causing delays); (2) in-ducing semantic confusion through conflicting messages or object-label pairs that make correct interpretation difficult; and (3) degrading user safety, trust, or decision quality by introducing deceptive cues that produce harmful outcomes, such as the examples shown in Fig. 3. Collectively, these behaviors constitute a contradictory virtual content attack, in which multiple virtual elements present mutually incon-sistent semantics within the same AR scene. 

3.3. Attacker Knowledge 

We assume a gray-box threat setting. The attacker applica-tion operates with the same privileges as a legitimate AR application and can access only information that is publicly exposed through standard APIs. Specifically, the attacker can observe the composited scene visible to the user, includ-ing passthrough camera frames, depth information, and vir-tual content rendered by its own application, when such ac-cess is permitted by the platform. The attacker can also pos-sess general knowledge of the victim application’s intended functionality and of the platform’s rendering and composi-tion pipeline. However, the attacker has no privileged in-sight into the operating system or hardware firmware, nor can it obtain private data or rendering parameters from other applications. Cloud-based services used by the platform or by legitimate applications are treated as trusted and non-compromisable under this model. 

3.4. Attacker Capability 

Given the above knowledge, the attacker application can create and render arbitrary virtual objects, text, or overlays within its own application using legitimate rendering APIs. It can control what content to display, where to place it in the scene, and when to present or remove it, enabling se-mantic manipulations such as contradictory labels, conflict-ing indicators, or temporally alternating cues. The attacker may utilize both local computation and external (trusted) cloud resources to generate or update these assets. How-ever, it cannot alter virtual content rendered by other ap-plications, tamper with sensor data, modify the composi-tor’s blending process, intercept inter-application commu-nication, or escalate privileges to access protected OS com-ponents. Hardware spoofing and denial-of-service attacks are out of our scope. 

3.5. Attack Detection System Capability 

Similar to the attacker application, the attack detection sys-tem also runs as a user-level process observing the same composited frames visible to the user. It has view-only ac-cess and cannot query per-application render lists or use privileged APIs; consequently, it cannot attribute a specific virtual element to its source application. The detector em-ploys multimodal reasoning components, especially VLMs, to analyze relationships among virtual elements and iden-tify inconsistencies. Its goal is to detect contradictory or manipulative virtual content in real time using only visual evidence. Cloud-based VLM reasoning services used by the detector are trusted for correctness and integrity. 

3.6. Scope of Attack 

This work focuses on semantic-level attacks that alter the meaning or relationships among virtual elements without compromising the underlying hardware or OS. Physical tampering, sensor spoofing, or system-level privilege es-calation are excluded. An attack is considered successful if contradictory virtual content is successfully introduced into the user’s view and remains undetected by the detec-tor within a reasonable temporal window. In conclusion, all three entities (the victim application, the attacker ap-plication, and the detection system) operate with ordinary application-level privileges, and the threat model is con-fined to semantic information manipulation and contradic-tion rather than any form of system-level compromise. 

# 4. ContrAR Dataset 

Building on the threat model above, we construct a dataset, ContrAR, which systematically represents contradictory virtual content attacks across multiple practical AR appli-cations. Our design goals are realism, diversity of attack modes, and reproducible annotation. 

4.1. Contradictory Virtual Content Attack Design 

Following the threat model introduced in Section 3, we for-mally define the structure of a contradictory virtual con-tent attack . In such attacks, the attacker introduces vir-tual elements whose semantics conflict with each other, thereby misleading the user. Importantly, the attack is de-fined purely at the semantic level: the attack detector does not need to and cannot identify which element originates from the attacker or the victim application, but only whether a contradiction exists within the overall composited view. Formally, an AR scene may contain multiple virtual ele-ments that together form a set of n virtual contents: 

C = {c1, c 2, . . . , c n}, (1) where each ci represents a distinct virtual content, which can be an object, a label, or text visible to the user. Each content conveys a piece of semantic information I(ci) de-scribing its meaning or intent in the scene context. The col-lection of all such semantics is represented as 

I = {I(c1), I (c2), . . . , I (cn)}. (2) A scene is considered to exhibit a contradictory virtual content attack if at least two pieces of information in I are semantically inconsistent, that is: 

∃ (I(ci), I (cj )) ∈ I 2, i ̸ = j, such that I(ci) ⊥ I(cj ),

(3) 

> Figure 2. Dataset collection process demonstration. (a): dataset collector (AR user)’s view; (b): by-stander’s view.

where the relation ⊥ denotes semantic contradiction be-tween two statements. Intuitively, this means that the cor-responding virtual elements communicate mutually exclu-sive or logically incompatible information, such as an arrow pointing to left versus text “Turn Right,” or a unlocked sign versus text ‘the door has been locked”, as Fig. 1 shows. If no such contradictory pair exists, i.e., 

∀ (I(ci), I (cj )) ∈ I 2, i ̸ = j, I (ci)̸ ⊥ I(cj ), (4) the scene is labeled as non-contradictory . We then define the ground-truth label for a video V as 

C(V ) = 

(

1, if ∃ I(ci) ⊥ I(cj ),

0, otherwise.  (5) This formalization provides a logical criterion for iden-tifying contradictory virtual content attacks. It also aligns with our detector’s design objective: to determine whether a scene contains contradiction content, rather than attribut-ing specific content to attacker or victim applications. 

4.2. Dataset Collection Pipeline 

To capture realistic attacks, we implement five representa-tive victim AR application cases on Meta Quest 3 that re-flect common, safety-relevant use cases: indoor navigation (IN), outdoor navigation (ON), safety inspection (SI), smart apartment (SA), and smart retail (SR). Each application em-bodies plausible user-facing functionality and therefore pro-vides natural opportunities for semantic manipulation. For each application, contradictory attack patterns were manu-ally designed through structured brainstorming with three AR experience experts, focusing on the real-world back-ground and semantically conflicting virtual cues. We de-sign attacker behaviors for each scene of each app to mirror the attacker purposes in our threat model (misleading nav-igation cues, contradictory status indicators, etc.), enabling evaluation of detection under diverse threat instances. For convenience and reproducibility in data collection, a single unified app is used to simulate all five AR use cases and also act alternately as the victim app and the attacker app during recording. This design choice aligns with our assumption about the attack detector, which operates at the semantic level and does not possess the capability to distin-guish between content generated by different applications. Figure 3. Samples frames from the ContrAR dataset. Each column shows an AR application. The top row shows the contradictory examples. From left to right: (a) Indoor navigation: the text on the virtual arrow indicates the restroom is not accessible, which contradicts with the disabled sign on the virtual restroom sign; (b) Outdoor navigation: the text in the virtual dialog box instructs the user to park here, which is contradictory to the information provided by a virtual “No Parking” sign; (c) Safety inspection: the text in the virtual dialog box “Caution: Biohazard” is contradictory with the virtual sign which stands for “Caution: High Voltage”; (d) Smart apartment: the text in the virtual dialog box indicates the laptop is fully charged, which contradicts the virtual “low battery” sign; (e) Smart retail: the text on the virtual arrow tells the user the box is made in the Netherlands, which contradicts to the label next to the box saying it is from France. The bottom row shows the non-contradictory examples, where the information provided by different virtual content aligned with each other. Table 1. Data distribution of ContrAR dataset by victim AR apps and attack labels.                         

> Victim AR Application IN ON SI SA SR Total
> Contradictory 27 30 21 45 33 156
> Non-Contradictory 27 30 21 45 33 156
> Total Number 54 60 42 90 66 312

In each recorded session, the app places the benign virtual content based on the real-world context and, depending on the experimental condition, an additional set of hypotheti-cal attacker-generated virtual elements that either introduce a semantic contradiction or do not. All of the virtual content is precisely placed at the manually designated location with the help of Meta Quest 3’s built-in spatial tracking function-ality. Each resulting video therefore contains the compos-ited scene that a real user would observe, and is labeled as contradictory or non-contradictory. During data collection, we used a Meta Quest 3 headset as the AR platform. The AR application was developed in Unity 6000.1.7f1, employing ARCore for spatial tracking. The Meta SDK was used to access the main camera stream, and all recordings were captured using the headset’s built-in screen-recording functionality to ensure fidelity to the user’s actual view. An example figure showing our video collection process is shown in Fig. 2. 

4.3. Dataset Composition 

With the data collection pipelines, we develope the Con-trAR dataset. ContrAR consists of 312 videos, each repre-senting a unique AR scenario. To ensure a balanced compo-sition and avoid bias, we collected a strict 1:1 ratio of con-tradictory (positive) and non-contradictory (negative) video samples. Among all the videos, 90 videos contain only tex-tual virtual content, while 222 videos contain both visual and textual virtual content. Each video in the dataset has a resolution of 1920×1080 pixels and a duration ranging from 5 to 15 seconds. The videos had a framerate of 30 FPS.The full dataset composition is shown in Tab. 1. Some of the data examples, together with the attack labels, are shown in Fig. 3. The full dataset, including video and attack labels, is publicly released on Github. 

4.4. User-Based Data Validation 

With the collected videos, we manually assigned each sample a label of either “Contradictory ” or “Non-contradictory .” To evaluate the reliability of these labels, we conducted an IRB-approved, user-based data validation study. A group of 10 participants was recruited to review the entire dataset and independently determine whether each video contained contradictory virtual content. For each video, participants rated their level of agreement with the question “Do you agree that the information provided in this video is contradictory, which may lead to users’ confusion, misunderstanding, or incorrect actions?” on a 5-point Likert scale [26], ranging from 1 (strongly disagree) to 5 (strongly agree). For non-contradictory samples, where disagreement indicates a correct judgment, the scores were inverted by subtracting each value from 6, ensuring that higher scores consistently reflected stronger agreement with the ground-truth label. The user interface used for this validation pro-cess is built with Gradio [1], as illustrated in Fig. 4. The agreement score distribution is shown in Fig. 5, and Figure 4. Interface used in the user-based labeling task for evalu-ating contradictory virtual content in AR videos. 0.0 20.0 40.0 60.0 80.0 100.0 

> Percentage
> (a)
> (b)
> (c)
> (d)
> (e)
> (f)
> Agreement
> Level
> Strongly
> Agree
> Agree
> Neutral
> Disagree
> Strongly
> Disagree

Figure 5. User agreement with contradictory virtual content at-tack labels in the ContrAR dataset. (a) The overall distribution of Likert-scale responses. (b)-(f) Likert responses for all five AR ap-plication scenes: (b) indoor navigation, (c) outdoor navigation, (d) safety inspection, (e) smart apartment, (f) smart retail. 

the average score across all videos is 4.66, demonstrating strong consistency between the dataset annotations and hu-man judgments. These user validation results confirm the perceptual reliability of ContrAR and indicate that the de-signed contradictory virtual content attacks are generally recognized and agreed upon by human participants. 

# 5. Experiment and Results 

5.1. Experiment Design 

With the constructed dataset, we conducted a compre-hensive evaluation of multiple state-of-the-art commer-cial VLMs, including GPT [27, 28]], Gemini [15, 17], Grok [39], and Claude [3, 4], as well as two open-source models, Qwen-2.5-VL-72B and Qwen-2.5-VL-7B. These models were selected as representative examples of the ad-vanced proprietary multimodal systems. In addition to these image-based VLMs, we include a text-only LLm baseline that assesses contradiction purely from extracted textual overlays. For each video, we applied an OCR engine, Easy-OCR, to the same selected frame(s) and aggregated all de-tected text snippets into a structured list. This text-only representation was then provided to GPT-4o, which was prompted to judge whether the extracted textual informa-tion exhibited semantic contradiction. To examine both the efficiency and robustness of seman-tic reasoning in AR scenes, we designed two prompting strategies for inference: (1) a single-frame setting, in which only one frame in the video is provided as input to simulate 

Figure 6. Pipeline for evaluating VLMs on the ContrAR. 

fast, real-time decision-making; and (2) a multi-frame set-ting, in which multiple frames are provided to capture tem-poral context. In the single-frame setting, the frame selected corresponds to the exact midpoint of the video sequence, representing a typical view of the scene. In the multi-frame setting, three frames are sampled from each video: the first, middle, and last frames, providing the model with consec-utive visual information across time. For Qwen models, due to their limited context size, the frames used in the multi-frame setting are downsampled by 50%. While this setting offers richer temporal cues, it also increases infer-ence latency and, in some cases, may reduce accuracy due to the introduction of redundant or distracting information. Each model is prompted using a unified instruction template designed to elicit reasoning about semantic contradiction in AR content, as shown below. The words in brackets (e.g., image/images) indicate the differences between the two prompting strategies, where the singular form corre-sponds to the single-frame setting and the plural form cor-responds to the multi-frame setting.       

> “You are an expert in evaluating augmented reality (AR) experiences. I will show you an image that represents the user’s view of an AR ap-plication. Your task is to analyze whether the virtual content in the image is contradictory with each other. Please answer the following questions one by one:
> 1. What is (are) the real-world scenario shown in the image (images)? Provide a brief description of the environment and the objects present.
> 2. Describe the virtual content in the image (images). What are the virtual objects, where are they placed, and how do they visually inter-act with the real-world scene?
> 3. Does the information of the virtual content in the image (images) contradict with each other? Provide a detailed explanation of any inconsistencies or manipulations you identify. You should analyze whether the information provided by the virtual content is confusing or misleading to the user.
> 4. Based on your analysis in Question 3, could the virtual content in this image(these images) potentially lead to misunderstanding, dis-traction, or harm? If yes, answer only with **“Yes”**. Otherwise, answer with **“No”**.”

The commercial VLMs are accessed through their provider APIs, while open-source models are evaluated us-ing the HuggingFace Inference API. After the model gener-ates its response, a post-processing step is applied to extract the final prediction. Specifically, we examine the model’s last sentence and check whether it outputs “Yes” or “No” in response to Question 4 of the prompt. In the results, all models produced explicit Yes/No answers in all of the cases. Here, although Question 4 explicitly asks about con-Table 2. Detection accuracy and latency of different detection methods on ContrAR benchmark.                                                                                                                                                                                        

> Detection Method Prompting Method Contradictory Virtual Content Attack Detection Accuracy (%) Detection Latency (second) Indoor Navigation Outdoor Navigation Safety Inspection Smart Apartment Smart Retail Overall
> GPT-5 Single Frame 81.48 91.67 80.95 94.44 86.36 88.14 19.29 Multiple Frames 83.33 88.33 78.57 92.22 80.30 85.58 23.78
> GPT-4.1 Single Frame 79.63 86.67 90.48 84.44 71.21 82.05 11.47 Multiple Frames 85.19 85.00 88.10 93.33 78.79 86.54 16.61
> GPT-4o Single Frame 83.33 86.67 71.43 77.78 75.76 79.17 5.92 Multiple Frames 88.89 90.00 80.95 86.67 75.76 84.62 7.26
> Gemini-2.5-Pro Single Frame 75.93 90.00 83.33 86.67 81.82 83.97 14.29 Multiple Frames 83.33 81.67 66.67 82.22 65.15 76.60 15.56
> Gemini-2.5-Flash Single Frame 85.19 80.00 69.05 88.89 69.70 79.81 9.90 Multiple Frames 75.93 76.67 59.52 76.67 63.64 71.47 10.58
> Grok-4 Single Frame 75.93 75.00 64.29 61.11 68.18 68.27 27.76 Multiple Frames 64.81 70.00 64.29 57.78 69.70 64.74 49.09
> Grok-2-Vision Single Frame 74.07 70.00 61.90 57.78 63.64 64.74 4.66 Multiple Frames 74.07 73.33 76.19 56.67 59.09 66.03 6.28
> Claude-Sonnet-4.5 Single Frame 59.26 65.00 71.43 64.44 60.61 63.78 16.55 Multiple Frames 72.22 71.67 80.95 67.78 56.06 68.59 18.01
> Claude-Haiku-4.5 Single Frame 50.00 55.00 64.29 48.89 56.06 53.85 7.14 Multiple Frames 53.70 58.33 64.29 55.56 60.61 58.01 8.46
> Qwen-2.5-VL-72B Single Frame 55.56 70.00 50.00 62.22 59.09 60.26 13.51 Multiple Frames 72.22 76.67 54.76 58.89 59.09 64.10 14.93
> Qwen-2.5-VL-7B Single Frame 53.70 61.67 61.90 57.78 56.06 58.01 4.14
> Multiple Frames 72.22 66.67 59.52 54.44 46.97 58.97 4.29
> OCR-Text Only GPT-4o Single Frame 62.96 58.33 54.76 51.11 57.58 56.41 4.58 Multiple Frames 48.15 63.33 45.24 54.44 59.09 54.81 6.25

fusion or misleading effects, they are not used for labeling. Instead, they are discussed only as potential consequences of such contradictions. These terms appear in the prompts solely to provide an intuitive interpretation for VLMs and encourage them to think like human users. The overall ex-periment process is shown in Fig. 6. It is worth noting that although video-based multimodal models are emerging, we do not employ them here because (1) most VLM APIs do not yet support direct video input, and (2) continuous video streaming is impractical for real-time AR attack detection, where on-device compute and memory resources are severely constrained. 

5.2. Results and Analysis 

Tab 2 summarizes the attack detection accuracy and la-tency of 11 VLMs under both single-frame and multi-frame prompting conditions. All reported results are averaged over three independent runs. Overall, the best-performing model is GPT-5, achieving an average accuracy of 88.14% in the single-frame setting, followed by Gemini-2.5-Pro (83.97%, single frame) and GPT-4.1 (84.62%, multiple frames). In contrast, smaller or open-source light-weighted models show limited reasoning capability, such as Qwen-2.5-VL-7B, which achieves an accuracy of 58.97% (single frame), and Claude-Haiku-4.5 only reaches an accuracy of 53.85% (single frame). The OCR-based text-only baseline also performed poorly, achieving an accuracy of 56.41%. These results indicate that both open-source models and text-only approaches are substantially less effective for this task. The weaker performance of lightweight open-source VLMs is likely due to their limited semantic reasoning abil-ity, while text-only baseline is unable to capture contradic-tions that require visual reasoning ability. When comparing the two prompting strategies, the ef-fect of multi-frame input varies across models. Among all the models, GPT-4.1, GPT-4o, Grok-2-Vision, two Claude models, and two Qwen models benefit from multi-frame prompting, gaining up to 5% in overall accuracy, while GPT-5, two Gemini models, and Grok-4 experience perfor-mance degradation (up to 8%). This mixed trend suggests that while additional temporal context can provide comple-mentary cues for understanding the AR scenes, it may also introduce redundant or conflicting information that over-whelms the model’s reasoning process. In particular, some VLMs are optimized for static image reasoning rather than multi-image temporal inference, which explains why some models fail to integrate the additional frames effectively. In terms of latency, all the experiment were conducted and measured under a network of 500 Mbps on average. We observe that multi-frame prompting consistently increases inference time across all models because of longer prompts and the need to process multiple visual embeddings. This trade-off is critical in real AR applications, where decisions must be made as quickly as possible, since long attack de-tection delays can reduce the user’s experience and make Figure 7. Three typical failure cases. Subfigure (a) and (b) are false negative cases and (c) is a false positive case. 

the detection result less effective [23, 45]. For example, GPT-5 achieves the highest accuracy but incurs a latency ex-ceeding 19 s, which is almost impractical for interactive AR scenarios. In contrast, Qwen-2.5-VL-7B completes infer-ence in only 4.14 s but yields a much lower accuracy of only 58.01%, highlighting the trade-off between reasoning depth and real-time responsiveness. In contrast, GPT-4o main-tains a strong balance between accuracy and responsive-ness, achieving 84.62% accuracy with an average latency of about 7 s. This balanced performance suggests that, un-der current commercial constraints, models with moderate complexity and efficient multimodal processing pipelines may be more suitable for real-time AR reasoning tasks such as contradictory virtual content detection. We also provide a qualitative failure analysis, using GPT-5’s results as examples. We observe that there are mainly three reasons that could lead to VLM’s failure. Firstly, VLM fails to recognize all the virtual content. In Fig. 7 (a), the sunny icon is not recognized as virtual content, and the recognized virtual content (text box) is not considered as contradiction. Secondly, VLM fails to understand virtual content in the context of real world spatial information. In Fig. 7 (b), the arrow is leading the user to an elevator that is not working. However, while the VLM admits elevator is unavailable, it says “directional arrow suggests an differ-ent alternate way.”, which is not true and lead to prediction failure. Lastly, VLM fails to reason the semantic meaning of virtual content. In Fig. 7 (c), the pop-up tells the user the promotion information in the virtual content has expired, according to the current time information. However, the VLM says “the virtual elements conflict: one advertises an ongoing discount while the others state it is not valid.” In fact, the discount is not necessarily an ongoing event. These results collectively highlight that current VLMs possess a partial but limited capability to detect seman-tic contradictions in AR content, especially when low la-tency is required. While single-frame reasoning already yields competitive performance, achieving reliable multi-frame understanding without sacrificing efficiency remains an open challenge for next-generation multimodal models. 

# 6. Limitation and Future Work 

Although ContrAR represents the first systematic bench-mark for evaluating VLMs under contradictory virtual con-tent attacks, several limitations remain. First, the scale of both the dataset can be further expanded. Our current dataset provides initial reliability but may not fully cap-ture the diversity of AR environments or device rendering configurations. In future work, we plan to incorporate real-time attack generation using emerging 3D generative mod-els [25, 36, 40] and automatic virtual content placement methods [32, 35], rather than relying solely on manually placing the pre-designed virtual content. Such dynamic and procedurally generated adversarial content may better ap-proximate the nature of real-world AR attacks, enabling a more reliable and realistic benchmark. Second, while the user-based validation confirms the re-liability of the labels of the contradictory virtual content at-tack, their actual impact on user behavior has not yet been verified in real-world AR applications. The current vali-dation captures offline judgments rather than the dynamic cognitive and behavioral responses that arise during immer-sive AR experience. Future work will therefore include con-ducting in-situ user studies on head-mounted AR devices. In addition, we will integrate VLM-based attack detection systems into the AR prototype during these studies, allow-ing us to assess not only how users respond to the attacks but also how they evaluate the detection system’s performance. Finally, the current study focuses exclusively on seman-tic contradiction attacks, but the broader landscape of AR threats extends further. Future work will explore additional categories such as cognitive overload attacks [5, 11], which exploit users’ limited attention; and distraction attacks [20], where salient yet unimportant virtual content disrupts task performance without introducing explicit semantic conflict. Expanding the taxonomy and dataset to include these cases will enable a more comprehensive evaluation of AR secu-rity and user safety. 

# 7. Conclusion 

In this paper, we introduce ContrAR , the first benchmark for evaluating VLMs under contradictory virtual content attacks in AR environments. We formally defined the at-tack through a comprehensive threat model, constructed a real-world dataset with 312 user-validated AR videos, and conducted systematic evaluations across 11 state-of-the-art VLMs. Experiment results revealed that current models ex-hibit partial but limited capability in recognizing seman-tic contradictions among virtual elements, and that a clear trade-off exists between accuracy and inference latency. Our findings highlight both the promise and the current lim-itations of multimodal reasoning for AR safety. The bench-mark provides a standardized, reproducible foundation for future research on secure and trustworthy AR perception. In future work, we aim to extend ContrAR with larger-scale datasets, additional attack types, and in-situ user studies to further explore how semantic and cognitive-level manipula-tions impact real-world AR experiences. Acknowledgement 

We thank the participants of our user-based label valida-tion for their invaluable effort and assistance in this re-search. This work was supported in part by NSF grants CSR-2312760, CNS-2112562, and IIS-2231975, NSF CA-REER Award IIS-2046072, NSF NAIAD Award 2332744, a Cisco Research Award, a Meta Research Award, De-fense Advanced Research Projects Agency Young Faculty Award HR0011-24-1-0001, and the Army Research Labo-ratory under Cooperative Agreement Number W911NF-23-2-0224. The views and conclusions contained in this docu-ment are those of the authors and should not be interpreted as representing the official policies, either expressed or im-plied, of the Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency, the Army Research Laboratory, or the U.S. Government. This paper has been approved for public release; distribu-tion is unlimited. No official endorsement should be in-ferred. The U.S. Government is authorized to reproduce and distribute reprints for Government purposes notwith-standing any copyright notation herein. 

# References 

[1] Abubakar Abid, Ali Abdalla, Ali Abid, Dawood Khan, Ab-dulrahman Alfozan, and James Zou. Gradio: Hassle-free sharing and testing of ML models in the wild. arXiv preprint arXiv:1906.02569 , 2019. 5 [2] Maadh Al-Kalbani, Maite Frutos-Pascual, and Ian Williams. Virtual object grasping in augmented reality: Drop shadows for improved interaction. In Proceedings of International Conference on Virtual Worlds and Games for Serious Appli-cations , 2019. 2 [3] Anthropic. Introducing the Claude Haiku 4.5. https:// www.anthropic.com/news/claude-haiku-4-5 ,2025. 6 [4] Anthropic. Introducing the Claude Sonnet 4.5. https: //www.anthropic.com/news/claude- sonnet-4-5 , 2025. 6 [5] Josef Buchner, Katja Buntins, and Michael Kerres. The impact of augmented reality on cognitive load and perfor-mance: A systematic review. Journal of Computer Assisted Learning , 38(1), 2022. 8 [6] Rongqian Chen, Allison Andreyev, Yanming Xiu, Joshua Chilukuri, Shunav Sen, Mahdi Imani, Bin Li, Maria Gorla-tova, Gang Tan, and Tian Lan. A neurosymbolic framework for interpretable cognitive attack detection in augmented re-ality. arXiv preprint arXiv:2508.09185 , 2025. 2 [7] Rongqian Chen, Shu Hong, Rifatul Islam, Mahdi Imani, Gang Tan, and Tian Lan. Demo: Perception graph for cog-nitive attack reasoning in augmented reality. In Proceedings of the 26th International Symposium on Theory, Algorithmic Foundations, and Protocol Design for Mobile Networks and Mobile Computing , 2025. 3 [8] Si Chen and Jie Wu. Securing augmented reality applica-tions. In Network Security Empowered by Artificial Intelli-gence , pages 331–354. Springer, 2024. 3 [9] Kaiming Cheng, Jeffery F. Tian, Tadayoshi Kohno, and Franziska Roesner. Exploring user reactions and mental models towards perceptual manipulation attacks in mixed re-ality. In Proceedings of USENIX Security Symposium , 2023. 1[10] Marie-Catherine De Marneffe, Anna N Rafferty, and Christopher D Manning. Finding contradictions in text. In 

Proceedings of acl-08: Hlt , pages 1039–1047, 2008. 2 [11] Jayfus T Doswell and Anna Skinner. Augmenting human cognition with adaptive augmented reality. In International Conference on Augmented Cognition , 2014. 8 [12] Huiyu Duan, Lantu Guo, Wei Sun, Xiongkuo Min, Li Chen, and Guangtao Zhai. Augmented reality image quality as-sessment based on visual confusion theory. In Proceedings of IEEE International Symposium on Broadband Multimedia Systems and Broadcasting (BMSB) , 2022. 2 [13] Lin Duan, Elias Rotondo, Yanming Xiu, Sangjun Eom, Ryan Chen, Conrad Li, Yuhe Hu, and Maria Gorlatova. Prob-ing the augmented reality scene analysis capabilities of large multimodal models: Toward reliable real-time assessment solutions. IEEE Internet Computing , 2025. 2 [14] Lin Duan, Yanming Xiu, and Maria. Gorlatova. Advancing the understanding and evaluation of AR-generated scenes: When vision-language models shine and stumble. In Pro-ceedings of IEEE Conference on Virtual Reality and 3D User Interfaces Abstracts and Workshops (VRW) , 2025. 2 [15] Gheorghe Comanici et al. Gemini 2.5: Pushing the frontier with advanced reasoning, multimodality, long context, and next generation agentic capabilities, 2025. 1, 6 [16] Mingyu Fu, Wei Fang, Shan Gao, Jianhao Hong, and Yizhou Chen. Edge computing-driven scene-aware intelligent aug-mented reality assembly. The International Journal of Ad-vanced Manufacturing Technology , 119(11), 2022. 2 [17] Gemini Team. Gemini: A family of highly capable multi-modal models. arXiv:2312.11805 , 2024. 6 [18] Jes´ us Guti´ errez, Toinon Vigier, and Patrick Le Callet. Qual-ity evaluation of 3D objects in mixed reality for different lighting conditions. Electronic Imaging , 32, 2020. 2 [19] Mehran Kazemi, Quan Yuan, Deepti Bhatia, Najoung Kim, Xin Xu, Vaiva Imbrasaite, and Deepak Ramachandran. Boardgameqa: A dataset for natural language reasoning with contradictory information. In Advances in Neural Informa-tion Processing Systems , 2023. 1, 2 [20] Hyungil Kim and Joseph L Gabbard. Assessing distraction potential of augmented reality head-up displays for vehicle drivers. Human factors , 64(5), 2022. 8 [21] Sinyoung Kim, Yeonjoon Kim, and Sunghee Lee. On visual artifacts of physics simulation in augmented reality environ-ment. In Proceeings of International Symposium on Ubiqui-tous Virtual Reality , 2011. 2 [22] K. Lebeck, K. Ruth, T. Kohno, and F. Roesner. Arya: Oper-ating system support for securely augmenting reality. IEEE Security & Privacy , 16(01), 2018. 1 [23] Cha Lee, Scott Bonebrake, Doug A Bowman, and Tobias H¨ ollerer. The role of latency in the validity of AR simulation. In 2010 IEEE virtual reality conference (VR) , pages 11–18. IEEE, 2010. 8 [24] Tinghao Li, Hiromasa Suzuki, Yutaka Ohtake, Tatsuya Yata-gawa, and Shinji Matsuda. Efficient evaluation of misalign-ment between real and virtual objects for HMD-based AR assembly assistance system. Advanced Engineering Infor-matics , 59, 2024. 2 [25] Xiaoyu Li, Qi Zhang, Di Kang, Weihao Cheng, Yiming Gao, Jingbo Zhang, Zhihao Liang, Jing Liao, Yanpei Cao, and Ying Shan. Advances in 3D generation: A survey. arXiv preprint arXiv:2401.17807 , 2024. 8 [26] Rensis Likert. A technique for the measurement of attitudes. 

Archives of Psychology , 1932. 5 [27] OpenAI. GPT-4 technical report. arXiv:2303.08774 , 2023. 6[28] OpenAI. GPT-5 system card. https://cdn.openai.com/gpt-5-system-card.pdf , 2025. 1, 6 [29] Liangming Pan, Wenhu Chen, Min-Yen Kan, and William Yang Wang. Attacking open-domain question answering by injecting misinformation. In Proceedings of the 13th International Joint Conference on Natural Lan-guage Processing and the 3rd Conference of the Asia-Pacific Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics (IJCNLP-AACL) , 2023. 1, 2 [30] Olivier Pauly, Benoit Diotte, Pascal Fallavollita, Simon Wei-dert, Ekkehard Euler, and Nassir Navab. Machine learning-based augmented reality for improved surgical scene under-standing. Computerized Medical Imaging and Graphics , 41, 2015. 2 [31] Marek A Pedziwiatr, Matthias K¨ ummerer, Thomas SA Wal-lis, Matthias Bethge, and Christoph Teufel. Semantic object-scene inconsistencies affect eye movements, but not in the way predicted by contextualized meaning maps. Journal of Vision , 22(2), 2022. 2 [32] Aditya Sharma, Luke Yoffe, and Tobias H¨ ollerer. OCTO+: A Suite for Automatic Open-Vocabulary Object Placement in Mixed Reality . In IEEE International Conference on Artifi-cial Intelligence and eXtended and Virtual Reality (AIxVR) ,2024. 3, 8 [33] Carter Slocum, Yicheng Zhang, Erfan Shayegani, Pedram Zaree, Nael Abu-Ghazaleh, and Jiasi Chen. That doesn’t go there: Attacks on shared state in multi-user augmented real-ity applications. In Proceedings of USENIX Security Sympo-sium , 2024. 1 [34] Dennis Sprute, Philipp Viertel, Klaus T¨ onnies, and Matthias K¨ onig. Learning virtual borders through semantic scene un-derstanding and augmented reality. In 2019 IEEE/RSJ In-ternational Conference on Intelligent Robots and Systems (IROS) , 2019. 2 [35] Sruti Srinidhi, Edward Lu, and Anthony Rowe. XaiR: An XR platform that integrates large language models with the physical world. In IEEE International Symposium on Mixed and Augmented Reality (ISMAR) , 2024. 3, 8 [36] Dmitry Tochilkin, David Pankratz, Zexiang Liu, Zixuan Huang, Adam Letts, Yangguang Li, Ding Liang, Christian Laforte, Varun Jampani, and Yanpei Cao. TripoSR: Fast 3D object reconstruction from a single image. arXiv preprint arXiv:2403.02151 , 2024. 8 [37] Wenjie Tseng, Elise Bonnail, Mark McGill, Mohamed Khamis, Eric Lecolinet, Samuel Huron, and Jan Gugen-heimer. The dark side of perceptual manipulations in vir-tual reality. In Proceedings of the ACM CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems , 2022. 1 [38] Oliver Wasenm¨ uller, Marcel Meyer, and Didier Stricker. Augmented reality 3D discrepancy check in industrial ap-plications. In Proceedings of IEEE International Symposium on Mixed and Augmented Reality (ISMAR) , 2016. 2 [39] XAI. Grok 4 fast model card. https://data.x.ai/2025-09-19-grok-4-fast-model-card.pdf , 2023. 1, 6 [40] Jianfeng Xiang, Zelong Lv, Sicheng Xu, Yu Deng, Ruicheng Wang, Bowen Zhang, Dong Chen, Xin Tong, and Jiaolong Yang. Structured 3D latents for scalable and versatile 3d generation. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Computer Vi-sion and Pattern Recognition Conference (CVPR) , 2025. 8 [41] Yanming Xiu and Maria Gorlatova. Detecting visual infor-mation manipulation attacks in augmented reality: A multi-modal semantic reasoning approach. IEEE Transactions on Visualization and Computer Graphics , 31(11), 2025. 3 [42] Yanming Xiu and Maria Gorlatova. Demonstrating visual information manipulation attacks in augmented reality: Ahands-on miniature city-based setup. In Proceedings of the International Symposium on Theory, Algorithmic Founda-tions, and Protocol Design for Mobile Networks and Mobile Computing (MobiHoc) , 2025. 1 [43] Yanming Xiu, Tim Scargill, and Maria Gorlatova. ViDDAR: Vision Language Model-Based Task-Detrimental Content Detection for Augmented Reality . IEEE Transactions on Visualization and Computer Graphics , 31(05), 2025. 1, 3 [44] Qianqi Yan, Yue Fan, Hongquan Li, Shan Jiang, Yang Zhao, Xinze Guan, Ching-Chen Kuo, and Xin Eric Wang. Multi-modal inconsistency reasoning (MMIR): A new benchmark for multimodal reasoning models, 2025. 2 [45] Wenxiao Zhang, Bo Han, and Pan Hui. Sear: Scaling expe-riences in multi-user augmented reality. IEEE Transactions on Visualization and Computer Graphics , 28(5):1982–1992, 2022. 8