Title: Belted Engression: Sufficient Dimension Reduction for Generative Distributional Regression

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2609.23789v1

Published Time: Tue, 22 Sep 2026 01:46:28 GMT

Number of Pages: 32

Markdown Content:
# Belted Engression: Sufficient Dimension Reduction for Generative Distributional Regression 

# Wenxi Tan, Bing Li, and Lingzhou Xue Department of Statistics, The Pennsylvania State University 

Abstract 

Modern conditional generative models face significant challenges when learning complex covariate dependencies. While sufficient dimension reduction (SDR) provides a principled approach to compress these dependencies, traditional SDR frameworks were not formulated for conditional generation. To bridge this gap, we propose Belted Engression, a unified and architecturally parameter-efficient framework for genera-tive distributional regression. Our approach establishes an end-to-end compress-then-generate paradigm driven by sufficient representation learning, embedding a structural bottleneck into the generative architecture. Theoretically, we prove that the stan-dard SDR condition is equivalent to a law-preserving generative factorization, which is achieved at the global optimum of the population Belted Engression objective. Fur-thermore, by uncovering a localized Bernstein-type control for the energy-score loss, we establish finite-sample convergence rates that are sharper than those of existing results. We also prove that this belted architecture is strictly smaller, operating with an asymp-totically vanishing parameter count relative to the unstructured baseline. Extensive simulations and real-world applications demonstrate that Belted Engression achieves superior distributional prediction and SDR recovery with fewer trainable parameters. 

Keywords: Energy Statistics; Generative Model; Neural Networks; Representation Learning. 

# 1 Introduction 

Regression analysis seeks to understand the dependence of a response Y on covariates X.While classical methods focus on point summaries, such as the conditional mean E[Y |X = x]or conditional quantiles, a growing number of scientific applications require learning the full conditional distribution of Y given X = x. Estimating this conditional law enables valid pre-diction intervals, conditional sampling, and the discovery of complex distributional effects beyond mean shifts. However, parametric families are often too rigid for modeling het-eroscedasticity or multimodality in complex data, and traditional nonparametric regression and density estimation scale poorly as the covariate dimension grows (Scott 2015). 1arXiv:2609.23789v1 [cs.LG] 20 Sep 2026 To overcome these limitations, generative neural networks (Kingma & Welling 2014, Goodfellow et al. 2014) have emerged as central tools for generating samples from complex, multivariate conditional laws. Among these generative approaches, Engression (Shen & Meinshausen 2025) has recently gained significant traction as a simple, flexible, and compu-tationally lightweight framework for distributional regression. Trained via an energy-score-based objective, Engression models the conditional distribution by directly feeding both the full covariates X and auxiliary random noise η into a neural network generator. Engression remains empirically competitive and has found application in fields ranging from environ-mental science (Kraft et al. 2026) to single-cell biology (von K¨ ugelgen et al. 2025). Despite recent advances in neural generative models, learning conditional laws in the pres-ence of many covariates faces a significant statistical challenge. While Engression methods leverage latent noise to generate stochastic output variation, their generators remain condi-tioned on the full covariate vector X ∈ Rp, and as demonstrated by Huang et al. (2026) re-cently, this direct conditioning on an uncompressed covariate vector causes convergence rates to deteriorate sharply as the combined dimension of the input increases. Existing attempts to mitigate this dimension-driven complexity often rely on implicit structural assumptions, such as imposing hierarchical structures on the conditional quantile function (Chai et al. 2026) or assuming the conditional generator is composed of low-dimensional smooth functions (Chen et al. 2026). However, these theoretical assumptions describe the structure strictly through the functional form of the target generator, and they do not explicitly extract or isolate a separate low-dimensional summary of the response-relevant information in X.The success of modern deep learning relies heavily on extracting lower-dimensional, task-relevant features from complex data (Bengio et al. 2013). Adopting this explicit representa-tion learning perspective offers a more direct and interpretable alternative to implicit struc-tural constraints. By isolating the low-dimensional structure into a distinct feature space, we can compress the covariates through a representational bottleneck before they enter the stochastic generation step. Image-valued covariates provide a compelling example: while an image may contain thousands of pixels with many reflecting noise or irrelevant background variation, its response-relevant features often lie on a lower-dimensional geometric structure (Roweis & Saul 2000). Learning such a representation before conditional generation reduces 2both the effective covariate dimension and the complexity of the required generator. This potential advantage motivates a fundamental research question for distributional regression: 

Can we leverage the principle of explicit representation learning (Bengio et al. 2013) to design an information-preserving representation for conditional distribution generation? 

This principle is statistically captured by sufficient dimension reduction (SDR; Li 1991, Cook & Weisberg 1991, Cook 1998, Lee et al. 2013, Li 2018), which assumes that there exists a mapping s∗ : Rp → Rd, with d < p , such that 

Y X | s∗(X).

The resulting sufficient predictor s∗(X) retains all information in X relevant to the con-ditional law of Y , while providing an explicit and interpretable summary of the regression relationship. However, integrating this representational structure into an energy-score-based conditional generative framework, such as Engression, is by no means straightforward. Clas-sical SDR estimation relies on inverse regression, forward regression, or reproducing kernel regression, which operate directly on the predictors, but in the context of Engression, there is an additional latent noise variable to be incorporated. Moreover, SDR seeks to determin-istically compress the covariates into low-dimensional summaries for inference, visualization, and prediction (Li 2018, Zhang et al. 2024a,b, Xu et al. 2025, Tang & Li 2026). In contrast, generative models rely on expanding latent noise to generate samples from the conditional distribution. Hence, designing a single implicit generative objective that can simultaneously induce dimension reduction and accurate distributional sampling remains a critical gap. In this paper, we propose Belted Engression , a novel and architecturally parameter-efficient generative framework for conditional distribution learning. To overcome the re-strictive distributional assumptions of inverse regression estimators and the inefficiencies of decoupled multistep pipelines, Belted Engression establishes a compress-then-generate 

paradigm that explicitly embeds law-preserving dimension reduction into the generative ar-chitecture. Optimized end-to-end via a unified energy-score objective, it jointly learns a sufficient-predictor mapping s, termed the belt , which acts as a sufficient representational bottleneck, alongside a reduced stochastic generator, ensuring that the conditional genera-3tion is driven by a low-dimensional representation of X. Thus, the learned belt provides an interpretable, low-dimensional summary of the dependence of X on Y .Equipped with this architecture, we establish the theoretical and empirical superiority of this unified approach. Our major contributions are summarized as follows. 

• A unified compress-then-generate paradigm for supervised learning. The architecture of Belted Engression redefines how covariates are handled in conditional generative modeling. While existing dimension-reduction generative models such as the variational autoencoders (VAEs) (Kingma & Welling 2014) and the distributional principal autoencoder (DPA) (Shen & Meinshausen 2024) are designed for unsupervised representation learning, Belted Engression provides a flexible and lightweight end-to-end supervised framework. By embedding a sufficient representational bottleneck into the energy-score-based objective, our approach structurally offers an interpretable and architecturally parameter-efficient solution for complex distribution learning. 

• A novel theoretical bridge between SDR and generative factorization. We establish a key bridge between classical SDR and modern deep generative architectures. Specifically, we prove that the standard SDR condition is mathematically equivalent to a compress-then-generate factorization, wherein a low-dimensional sufficient pre-dictor combined with auxiliary noise is sufficient to reproduce the full conditional law. Through Propositions 1–2, we establish that this law-preserving factorization is achieved at the global optimum of the population-level Belted Engression objective, providing a definitive theoretical justification for our architectural design. This proves that our framework recovers the true conditional law, matching the theoretical target of standard Engression while performing dimension reduction. 

• Refined finite-sample theory via localized complexity control. We develop a finite-sample analysis of Engression under standard H¨ older smoothness conditions. Our proof exploits a localized Bernstein-type control of the Engression loss (see Remark 1), which yields a tighter bound for near-optimal candidates (Bartlett & Mendelson 2006). We use this strategy to establish the finite-sample convergence rate for Belted Engres-sion in Theorem 1. Applied to Engression, it yields the refined rate in Proposition 4, 4which improves upon the bounds of Huang et al. (2026) and Chen et al. (2026). 

• Provable statistical and architectural efficiency. We establish that Belted En-gression improves on unstructured direct Engression in both statistical accuracy and model complexity. Theorem 2 demonstrates that our approach yields a finite-sample convergence rate that is sharper than the Engression counterpart, while Theorem 3 proves that this belted architecture is strictly smaller, operating with an asymptoti-cally vanishing parameter count relative to the unstructured baseline. These theoretical guarantees are supported by our simulations and real-world applications, confirming that Belted Engression simultaneously achieves accurate conditional distribution learn-ing, SDR recovery, and parameter efficiency to deliver superior conditional distribution learning while utilizing smaller, lighter models. The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 reviews the background and establishes the necessary notation. Section 3 introduces the proposed Belted Engression framework. Section 4 establishes our main theoretical results, developing the localized finite-sample convergence rates and architectural parameter efficiency bounds. Sections 5 and 6 demonstrate the empirical advantages of our approach through simulations and real-world applications, respectively. Section 7 includes a few concluding remarks. All proofs and additional technical details are deferred to the Supplementary Materials. 

# 2 Preliminaries 

Engression (Shen & Meinshausen 2025) models the conditional distribution of a response given covariates via a generative process. It transforms a latent random vector with a known reference distribution, given covariates, into samples from the conditional law of the response. 

The generator map. Let (Ω , F, P ) be a probability space, and (Ω X , FX ), (Ω Y , FY ), (Ω η, Fη) be measurable spaces, where Ω X ⊆ Rp, Ω Y ⊆ Rr, and Ω η ⊆ Rq. Let X : Ω →

ΩX and Y : Ω → ΩY be random vectors measurable with respect to F/FX and F/FY ,respectively. Let PX = P ◦ X−1 and PY = P ◦ Y −1 be the distributions of X and Y ,respectively, and PY |X is the conditional distribution of Y given X. Let η : Ω → Ωη be a 5latent random vector independent of ( X, Y ), with distribution Pη = P ◦ η−1, measurable with respect to F/Fη.The objective of Engression is to learn a generator map g∗ : Ω X × Ωη → ΩY such that the conditional distribution of g∗(X, η ) given X matches the conditional law of Y given X.For any fixed x ∈ ΩX , write the conditional law of Y given X = x as PY |X (· | x). For any generator map g : Ω X × Ωη → ΩY , let Pg(· | x) denote the conditional law of g(x, η ) given X

evaluated at a fixed x. Thus, the goal of Engression is to find a generator map g∗ satisfying 

Pg∗ (· | x) = PY |X (· | x) for PX -almost every x. (1) Once g∗ is learned, one can draw samples from the conditional distribution PY |X (· | x) by generating η ∼ Pη and evaluating g∗(x, η ). 

The energy loss. Let L1(Ω X × Ωη, ΩY ) be the class of all functions g : Ω X × Ωη → ΩY

that are measurable with respect to FX × F η/FY such that E∥g(X, η )∥ < ∞. We assume that g∗ ∈ L1(Ω X × Ωη, ΩY ) and E∥Y ∥ < ∞. For a probability measure μ on (Ω Y , FY ) and 

y ∈ ΩY , let ES( μ, y ) = E∥y − Z∥ − 12 E∥Z − Z′∥ where Z, Z ′ iid 

∼ μ. This quantity is called the energy score. Engression leverages the energy score ES( Pg(·| x), y ) to avoid the need for restrictive likelihood assumptions. Specifically, let L(g) = E[ES( Pg(·| X), Y )]. By η (X, Y ), 

L(g) can be rewritten as 

L(g) = E



∥Y − g(X, η )∥ − 12∥g(X, η ) − g(X, η ′)∥



. (2) Shen & Meinshausen (2025, Proposition 1) shows that g∗ in (1) is the minimizer of L(g): 

g∗ ∈ argmin g∈L1(Ω X ×Ωη ,ΩY )L(g). Hence, the energy loss provides a principled approach to learning the conditional law of Y given X via the empirical risk minimization of L(g). 

Neural network generators. Neural networks are central to this framework, as they can approximate complex, nonlinear generators and produce conditional samples through a single forward pass without requiring explicit density estimation. Formally, we parameterize these generators using feed-forward ReLU neural networks. A feed-forward network with input dimension a, output dimension b, and D hidden layers is represented as a function 

f : Ra → Rb satisfying f (x) = LD ◦ σ ◦ LD−1 ◦ σ ◦ · · · ◦ σ ◦ L0(x), where Lℓ(u) = Aℓu + bℓ for 6ℓ = 0 , . . . D , and σ(t) = max {t, 0} is the ReLU activation function applied componentwise. For each ℓ = 1 , . . . D , the function Lℓ ◦ σ constitutes the ℓ-th hidden layer, with Aℓ ∈

Rpℓ+1 ×pℓ as the weight matrix and bℓ ∈ Rpℓ+1 as the bias vector. Stacking the layer widths as ( p0, p 1, . . . , p D, p D+1 )⊤, with p0 = a and pD+1 = b, the network width is defined as W =max 1≤ℓ≤D pℓ. Let S denote the total number of affine parameters (i.e., network size), and for fully connected layers, the parameter count is PDℓ=0 pℓ+1 (pℓ + 1). While the parameters W, D and S may depend on the sample size n, we suppress this dependence in the notation for brevity. Assuming, without loss of generality, that the inputs are bounded in the unit hypercube [0 , 1] a, we let Fa,b N N (W, D, S, ¯B) denote the corresponding ReLU network class with input dimension a, output dimension b, width W , depth D, size 

S, and a uniform envelope bound ¯B > 0 such that max 1≤j≤b sup u∈[0 ,1] a |fj (u)| ≤ ¯B. 

# 3 Methodology 

This section formalizes the Belted Engression framework in two stages. First, we establish that the SDR condition induces a structured, factorized generative representation that pre-serves the target conditional law. Building upon this insight, we then construct the Belted Engression objective function and introduce its corresponding neural network estimator. 

# 3.1 SDR Factorization 

In regression problems, the information in X ∈ Rp about Y can often be captured by a lower-dimensional representation, such as indices, latent factors, or nonlinear representations; see, for example, Li (1991), Li (2018), and Fan et al. (2017). This is the premise of sufficient dimension reduction (SDR), which assumes the existence of a low-dimensional function s∗(X)such that Y X | s∗(X). Thus, s∗(X), referred to as a sufficient predictor, preserves all information in X that is relevant to modeling Y .The following proposition formalizes a critical theoretical bridge between SDR and gener-ative factorization. Specifically, we will show that the SDR condition is equivalent to the exis-tence of a law-preserving factorization of the conditional law PY |X through a compress-then-generate approach. Let Ω S be a measurable set in Rd. For measurable maps s : Ω X → ΩS

7and h : Ω S × Ωη → ΩY , let Ps,h (· | X) denote the conditional law of the generated output 

h(s(X), η ) given X, and we define Ps,h (· | x) as the law of h(s(x), η ) with a fixed x.

Proposition 1. Let Ωη = [0 , 1] q. The following statements are equivalent. (i) There exists a measurable map s∗ : Ω X → ΩS such that X Y | s∗(X).(ii) There exist measurable maps s∗ : Ω X → ΩS and h∗ : Ω S × Ωη → ΩY such that, with 

η ∼ Unif(Ω η) independent of (X, Y ),

Ps∗,h ∗ (· | x) = PY |X (· | x) for PX -almost every x. (3) The factorization described in Proposition 1 is inherently non-unique. For example, any bijective transformation of the sufficient predictor s∗, together with an appropriate modification of the generator h∗, yields the identical conditional law. Our theoretical analysis therefore focuses on the conditional law induced by the factorization rather than the specific functional forms of s∗ and h∗. While Proposition 1 is stated using uniform noise to facilitate the subsequent neural network approximation theory, this representation holds analogously for any atomless noise distribution Pη, including the standard Gaussian distribution. From a representation learning perspective (Bengio et al. 2013), the map s∗ acts as a 

sufficient representational bottleneck . It structurally compresses the p-dimensional covariate space into a d-dimensional feature while guaranteeing no loss of generative capacity for Y .To facilitate the estimation of these components via neural networks, we assume that 

s∗(X) can be standardized to [0 , 1] d. That is, we take Ω S to be [0 , 1] d. Because any bounded sufficient predictor can be mapped into [0 , 1] d via an affine coordinate-wise rescaling without violating the conditional independence X Y | s∗(X), this requirement imposes no practical restriction. We formally state this compact representation as our structural assumption. 

Assumption 1. There exist an integer d < p and a measurable map s∗ : Ω X → [0 , 1] d = Ω S

such that X Y | s∗(X).

Under Assumption 1, Proposition 1(ii) shows the existence of a measurable map h∗ : Ω S ×

Ωη → ΩY satisfying (3). Throughout, we fix one such pair ( s∗, h ∗) as the population reference. 83.2 Population Objective and Empirical Estimator 

Building upon the law-preserving factorization established in Proposition 1, we introduce the core architecture of Belted Engression. Elevating the “belted” network topologies of Tang & Li (2026) to the generative setting, we represent the conditional law of Y given X via a composite generator h∗(s∗(X), η ). In this framework, s∗ : Ω X → ΩS serves as the belt —a sufficient representational bottleneck—that explicitly compresses the ambient covariates (Bengio et al. 2013). This low-dimensional feature manifold is then fed into the stochastic 

generator h∗ : Ω S × Ωη → ΩY . We now show that the pair ( s∗, h ∗) can be characterized as the population risk minimizer of a structured energy loss. Formally, we define the population objective of Belted Engression as 

L(s, h ) = E



∥Y − h(s(X), η )∥ − 12∥h(s(X), η ) − h(s(X), η ′)∥



,

where η, η ′ iid 

∼ Pη and ( η, η ′) (X, Y ). A pair ( s, h ) is said to be admissible if its components are measurable maps satisfying E[∥h(s(X), η )∥] < ∞.This objective L(s, h ) connects to the target conditional law PY |X via the energy distance (Sz´ ekely & Rizzo 2013). Recall that for two probability laws P, Q defined on the same Euclidean space, the squared energy distance between P and Q is given by 

D2 

> e

(P, Q ) = 2 E[∥A − B∥] − E[∥A − A′∥] − E[∥B − B′∥],

where A, A ′ i.i.d. 

∼ P and B, B ′ i.i.d. 

∼ Q are independent variables. Under Assumption 1, the above distances yield a crucial identity for the excess risk of any admissible pair ( s, h ): 

L(s, h ) − L (s∗, h ∗) = 12E D2

> e

 PY |X (· | X), P s,h (· | X) ≥ 0,

where E is the expectation with respect to X. By the properties of the energy distance, equality holds if and only if Ps,h (· | X) = PY |X (· | X) almost surely P ; see Supplementary Lemma S.1 for the proof. This identity yields the following population-risk characterization. 

Proposition 2. Under Assumption 1 and assuming E[∥Y ∥] < ∞,

9(i) (s∗, h ∗) minimizes L(s, h ) over all admissible measurable pairs (s, h ).(ii) If g∗ satisfies (1) , then Ps∗,h ∗ (· | X) = Pg∗ (· | X) = PY |X (· | X) almost surely P .

Proposition 2 shows that our SDR factorization is a valid population minimizer that recovers the target conditional law as unstructured Engression. Thus, embedding the belt reduces the parameterization of the generator without compromising its generative capacity. To construct a practical estimator, we parameterize the belt s and the generator h using the ReLU neural network classes introduced in Section 2. Specifically, we consider the spaces s ∈ S N N and h ∈ H N N , where SN N = {s ∈ F p,d N N (Ws, D s, S s, ¯Bs) : s([0 , 1] p) ⊆

[0 , 1] d}, and HN N = Fd+q,r N N (Wh, D h, S h, ¯Bh). The network parameters will be specified in Section 4. Visually and functionally, this parameterization structurally induces the sufficient representational bottleneck, as illustrated in Figure 1.                          

> x∈Rp
> (Predictors) Belt
> s:Rp→Rd
> Generator
> h:Rd×Rq→Rr
> x1
> x2
> x3
> x4
> z1
> z2
> ηη∼Pη
> (Noise)
> y1
> y2
> Conditional law of Y|X=x
> ≈h(s(x),·)#Pη
> Conditional generation
> {h(s(x), η j)}mj=1
> via η1, . . . , η m∼Pη

Figure 1: Belted Engression architecture for generative distributional regression, illustrated with p = 4, d = 2, q = 1, and r = 2. The belt maps the covariates X into a sufficient low-dimensional representation s(X), and the generator combines s(X) with simulation noise to approximate the conditional law of Y given X = x. Network depths and widths for this schematic are Ws = 6, Ds = 2 for the belt, and Wh = 4, Dh = 2 for the generator. Given an i.i.d. sample {(Xi, Y i)}ni=1 drawn from ( X, Y ), we approximate the population objective by drawing m ≥ 2 independent simulation noise vectors ηi1, . . . , η im from Pη =Unif([0 , 1] q) for each observation i. This yields the empirical objective of Belted Engression: ˆL(s, h ) = 1

n

> n

X

> i=1

"

1

m

> m

X

> j=1

∥Yi − h(s(Xi), η ij )∥ − 12m(m − 1) 

X 

> j̸=j′

∥h(s(Xi), η ij ) − h(s(Xi), η ij ′ )∥

#

.

The Belted Engression estimator (ˆ s, ˆh) is defined as the empirical risk minimizer of this 10 objective over the neural network classes SN N and HN N :(ˆ s, ˆh) ∈ arg min  

> s∈S N N , h ∈H N N

ˆL(s, h ).

Once trained, generating synthetic samples for a new covariate observation x is highly effi-cient. By drawing R independent noise vectors η1, . . . , η R, a single forward pass computes the generated samples ˆh(ˆ s(x), η 1), . . . , ˆh(ˆ s(x), η R). These simulated draws can then be used to estimate quantities such as conditional means, quantiles, and prediction intervals. 

# 4 Theoretical Properties 

This section establishes the finite-sample theoretical guarantees for Belted Engression and its unstructured Engression baseline. We first derive the convergence rates for both estima-tors under comparable H¨ older smoothness and network capacity conditions. By contrasting the resulting rate exponents and the parameter counts of the prescribed architectures, we will demonstrate how embedding the sufficient representational bottleneck simultaneously improves statistical efficiency and reduces overall architectural complexity. 

# 4.1 Convergence Rates for Belted Engression 

We introduce the regularity conditions required to establish the convergence rates. 

Assumption 2. Assume X ∈ [0 , 1] p and ∥Y ∥ ≤ BY almost surely for some BY > 0.

This boundedness condition is a standard regularity assumption in the theoretical anal-yses; see Song et al. (2026), Huang et al. (2026), Chai et al. (2026). Next, let β > 0, and let ⌊β⌋ denote the largest integer strictly smaller than β. For a positive integer k and B0 > 0, we define the H¨ older class as 

Hβ ([0 , 1] k, B 0)=

n

f : [0 , 1] k → R : max 

> α∈Nk
> 0
> ∥α∥1≤⌊ β⌋

∥∂αf ∥∞ ≤ B0, max 

> α∈Nk
> 0
> ∥α∥1=⌊β⌋

sup 

> x,y ∈[0 ,1] k
> x̸=y

|∂αf (x) − ∂αf (y)|∥x − y∥β−⌊ β⌋ ≤ B0

o

,

11 where N0 = {0, 1, 2, . . . }, ∂α = ∂α1 

> 1

· · · ∂αk 

> k

, and ∥α∥1 = Pki=1 αi. We say that f is β-H¨ older if f ∈ H β ([0 , 1] k, B 0) for B0 > 0, where the index β governs the intrinsic smoothness of f .Smoothness assumptions on the learning target are standard in nonparametric regression and generative modeling (Jiao et al. 2023, Song et al. 2026, Huang et al. 2026). Mov-ing beyond standard configurations, Chen et al. (2026) imposed hierarchical compositional smoothness on the generator, and Chai et al. (2026) imposed a related condition for scalar responses. Under such compositional frameworks, standard H¨ older smoothness represents the least structured configuration in which a single component depends on all inputs. In our framework, we apply the standard smoothness condition separately to the suffi-cient predictor and the reduced generator. An additional Lipschitz condition controls how estimation error in the sufficient predictor propagates through their composition. 

Assumption 3. For some βs, β h, B s, B h > 0, each coordinate of s∗ belongs to Hβs ([0 , 1] p, B s),each coordinate of h∗ belongs to Hβh ([0 , 1] d+q, B h), and h∗ is Lipschitz in its z-input: for all 

z, z ′ ∈ [0 , 1] d and e ∈ [0 , 1] q, ∥h∗(z, e ) − h∗(z′, e )∥ ≤ Lh∥z − z′∥ for some Lh > 0.

The Lipschitz requirement is satisfied in several standard regression models. In nonpara-metric regression with additive noise Y = f (X) + ϵ (Jiao et al. 2023), taking z = f (X)yields h∗(z, e ) = z + e, which is Lipschitz in z. The location-scale model Y = μ(X) + σ(X)ϵ,with ϵ X and σ > 0, provides another example by setting s∗(X) = ( μ(X), σ (X)) and 

h∗(z, e ) = z1 + z2e. Notably, Tang & Li (2026) imposed a stronger condition, requiring that all target functions are Lipschitz across all inputs. Following approximation theory literature (Song et al. 2026, Huang et al. 2026), we assume that network architectures are sufficiently wide to approximate the target belt s∗

and the reduced generator h∗ under fixed envelope constants. Hereafter, ≍ denotes equality up to positive constants depending only on the fixed dimensions and smoothness parameters. 

Assumption 4. ¯Bs ≥ 1 and ¯Bh ≥ 2BY .

Assumption 5. For ws, w h ∈ (0 , 1/2) , take Ns = ⌈nws / log 2 n⌉, Nh = ⌈nwh / log 2 n⌉, and 

Ms = Mh = ⌈log n⌉. Suppose Ws ≍ Ns log Ns, Ds ≍ Ms log Ms, Wh ≍ Nh log Nh, and 

Dh ≍ Mh log Mh.

12 The tuning parameters Ns, N h, M s and Mh govern the approximation capacity of the neural network class. They grow with the sample size n and are determined by the exponents 

ws and wh, which will be formally defined in the subsequent analysis. The exact architecture constants characterizing Ws, D s with respect to Ns, M s and Wh, D h with respect to Nh, M h

are provided in Supplementary Condition S.1, while the sizes Ss and Sh denote the total parameter counts of the resulting fully connected architectures. For real numbers a and b, write a ∧ b = min {a, b } and a ∨ b = max {a, b }. We define the training sample combined with generated noise as S = {(Xi, Y i, η i1, . . . , η im ) : i = 1 , . . . , n },

and let ES denote the average over S. Throughout our rate derivations, eO suppresses factors that are polylogarithmic in n and m, with constants independent of n and m.

Proposition 3. Suppose Assumptions 1, 2, 3, 4, and 5 hold, with the exact architecture constants in Supplementary Condition S.1. Then 

ES [L(ˆ s, ˆh) − L (s∗, h ∗)] = eO



n−2βsws/p + n−2βhwh/(d+q)

| {z }

> approximation error

+ n2ws−1 + n2wh−1

| {z }

> stochastic error

+ m−1/2nws−1/2 + m−1/2nwh−1/2

| {z }

> Monte Carlo error



.

Remark 1. The bound in Proposition 3 separates the approximation, stochastic, and Monte Carlo errors for both the belt and the reduced generator, paralleling the decompositions for Engression in Chen et al. (2026). However, a pivotal theoretical innovation of our work is the localized treatment of the stochastic error under standard H¨ older smoothness conditions. As established in Supplementary Lemma S.5, the stochastic error satisfies a Bernstein-type inequality (Bartlett & Mendelson 2006). Exploiting this property, Supplementary Lemma S.6 localizes the analysis to near-optimal candidates (Bartlett et al. 2005) and yields a sharper stochastic-error bound. In contrast, existing Engression analyses (Huang et al. 2026, Chen et al. 2026) rely on uniform control over the entire network class, resulting in looser bounds and suboptimal rate exponents. 

While Chai et al. (2026) provided a fine-grained analysis requiring the Monte Carlo simulation budget to grow rapidly to render its error negligible (that is, m noises are drawn from m1 batches of m2 noises, and m1m2 are required to grow quickly for the Monte Carlo 13 error to be negligible), Chen et al. (2026) and Huang et al. (2026) reported polynomial rates that are independent of m and valid for m ≥ 2. Our Theorem 1 optimizes ws and wh to yield a unified convergence rate for Belted Engression across varying simulation budgets. 

Theorem 1 (Rate of Belted Engression) . Under the conditions of Proposition 3, suppose that m ≍ nκ for κ ≥ 0.(1) Under the oracle choices of ws and wh, there is a threshold κ∗ 

> b

> 0, depending only on 

p, d, q, β s, and βh, such that 

ES [L(ˆ s, ˆh) − L (s∗, h ∗)] = 

eO



n−(1+ κ)   

> nβs
> 2βs +p∧βh
> 2βh+d+q
> o



, if 0 ≤ κ < κ ∗ 

> b

,

eO



n−   

> nβs βs +p∧βhβh+d+q
> o



, if κ ≥ κ∗ 

> b

.

(2) Moreover, if every coordinate of s∗ is β-H¨ older for every β > 0, then the oracle choices of ws and wh yield 

ES [L(ˆ s, ˆh) − L (s∗, h ∗)] = 

eO



n− (1+ κ)βh

> 2βh+d+q



, if 0 ≤ κ < βh

βh + d + q ,

eO



n− βhβh+d+q



, if κ ≥ βh

βh + d + q .

The oracle choices of ws and wh used in both parts, along with the threshold κ∗ 

> b

, are de-tailed in Supplementary Condition S.3. The two cases effectively distinguish the simulation-limited regime from the saturation threshold, beyond which increasing m yields no further improvement to the polynomial rate. In either regime, the final convergence exponent is determined by the slower of the two tasks: learning s∗ and learning h∗.Part (2) of Theorem 1 formalizes the statistical benefit of SDR for conditional generation. Engression learns directly on ( X, η ), meaning its standard H¨ older upper bound deteriorates with p+q (Huang et al. 2026). However, when s∗ is arbitrarily smooth (that is, s∗ is β-H¨ older for every β > 0), the complexity of learning the belt vanishes from the final rate, leaving a bound governed by d + q and βh. Thus, embedding the belt alters the dimensionality governing the statistical bound, ensuring the rate scales only with the intrinsic sufficient 14 dimension rather than the ambient space p.Furthermore, Part (2) of Theorem 1 covers classical structures in which s∗ is a linear projection or coordinate subvector, as seen in sliced inverse regression (Li 1991), generalized linear models (Nelder & Wedderburn 1972), single-index models (Lin & Kulasekera 2007) and feature screening (Fan & Lv 2008). This regime also covers classical nonlinear para-metric models whose conditional law depends on X through an analytic regression function, including polynomial, exponential, logistic-growth models (Davidian & Giltinan 2003). 

Remark 2 (Comparison with existing SDR methods.) . The fitted belt ˆs serves as the learned counterpart to the sufficient predictor s∗, which is the central target of SDR. While classi-cal sliced inverse regression and its variants (Li 1991, Li & Song 2017) can estimate such predictors, they often incur substantial computational costs as the sample size increases, as noted by Tang & Li (2026). The BENN architecture (Tang & Li 2026) improves this scal-ability, but strictly requires a user-specified ensemble of response transformations and fails to directly generate conditional samples. Alternatively, GenSDR (Xu et al. 2025) combines generative modeling and SDR through a flow-based construction. However, GenSDR relies heavily on the regularity of an induced velocity-field ordinary differential equation, and its theoretical convergence rate of n−1/(2+ p∨(r+2)) also deteriorates as the response dimension r

grows. In contrast, Belted Engression jointly estimates the sufficient predictor and performs conditional generation via a highly efficient forward pass, achieving a polynomial convergence exponent that is independent of the response dimension r.

# 4.2 Convergence Rates for the Engression Baseline 

We next turn to the convergence rate of the Engression baseline by applying the localized analysis underlying Proposition 3, specifically the Bernstein-type stochastic control. This approach yields a unified finite-( n, m ) convergence rate that provides a sharper bound than existing results under standard H¨ older smoothness when the simulation budget m grows. We begin by characterizing the smoothness of the unstructured generator g∗ in (1), analogous to the conditions placed on the sufficient predictor in Assumption 3. 

Assumption 6. Every coordinate of g∗ belongs to Hβg ([0 , 1] p+q, B g) for some βg, B g > 0.

15 To approximate g∗, we use GN N = Fp+q,r N N (Wg, D g, S g, ¯Bg) as the corresponding neural network space, where the meanings of the parameters Wg, D g, S g, ¯Bg are defined in Section 2. The next two assumptions impose a condition on ¯Bg and rates on Wg, D g, S g, ¯Bg. The exact specifications of the architecture constants are detailed in Supplementary Condition S.1. Hereafter, for any w ∈ (0 , 1/2), let Ng(w) = ⌈nw/ log 2 n⌉ and Mg(w) = ⌈log n⌉.

Assumption 7. The fixed envelope constant satisfies ¯Bg ≥ 2BY .

Assumption 8. For w ∈ (0 , 1/2) , Wg ≍ Ng(w) log Ng(w) and Dg ≍ Mg(w) log Mg(w).

The empirical objective for the unstructured estimator, acting as the finite-sample ana-logue to L(g) in (2) is formulated as: ˆL(g) = 1

n

> n

X

> i=1

(

1

m

> m

X

> j=1

∥Yi − g(Xi, η ij )∥ − 12m(m − 1) 

X 

> j̸=j′

∥g(Xi, η ij ) − g(Xi, η ij ′ )∥

)

,

where {ηij : i = 1 , . . . , n, j = 1 , . . . , m } are i.i.d. random vectors distributed as Unif([0 , 1] q). We denote its empirical minimizer by ˆg ∈ arg min 

> g∈G N N

ˆL(g).

Proposition 4 (Rate of Engression) . Suppose Assumptions 2, 6, 7, and 8 hold. Moreover, suppose m ≍ nκ for κ ≥ 0, and define the threshold κ∗ 

> e

= βg/(βg + p + q). Then, under the oracle choice of w detailed in Supplementary Condition S.2, 

ES [L(ˆ g) − L (g∗)] = 

eO



n− βg (1+ κ)2βg +p+q



, if 0 ≤ κ < κ ∗

> e

,

eO



n− βg βg +p+q



, if κ ≥ κ∗

> e

.

Proposition 4 provides a unified convergence spectrum across varying simulation budgets. For a fixed, small m, it recovers the standard nonparametric rate under H¨ older smoothness (Jiao et al. 2023). As m grows, the simulation error diminishes, and the overall rate improves until the observation-sample error becomes dominant, yielding the sharper large-m bound. Our unified bound in Proposition 4 facilitates a direct comparison with the existing literature. Three concurrent studies recently derived convergence rates for neural-network 16 Engression (Chai et al. 2026, Huang et al. 2026, Chen et al. 2026), and our Proposition 4 com-plements and extends these findings. Our analysis of the unbelted Engression baseline aligns most closely with Huang et al. (2026), which likewise assumes standard H¨ older smoothness over the full generative mapping. In contrast, Chen et al. (2026) assumes a composition of low-dimensional generator components, and Chai et al. (2026) imposes a hierarchical struc-ture on the conditional quantile function. The standard H¨ older smoothness serves as the unstructured specification of these compositional models. The following remarks explain the distinctions between our guarantees and these existing results. 

Remark 3 (Comparison with Chai et al. (2026)) . For scalar responses, Chai et al. (2026) obtained a faster theoretical rate by additionally assuming that the conditional cumulative distribution function (CDF) is uniformly Lipschitz. However, their results do not readily extend to multivariate responses, and this Lipschitz condition excludes target distributions with discrete atoms, a limitation mathematically demonstrated by the counterexample in Chen et al. (2026). Furthermore, Chai et al. (2026) assumed the simulation budget m diverges to a sufficiently large level, which is functionally equivalent to the large-m regime (i.e., κ ≥ κ∗

> e

) in our Proposition 4, while leaving the small-m regime (i.e., κ < κ ∗

> e

) unexplored. 

Remark 4 (Comparison with Huang et al. (2026) and Chen et al. (2026)) . Under the standard H¨ older smoothness assumption, the polynomial rates achieved by Huang et al. (2026) and Chen et al. (2026) coincide with the κ = 0 (fixed simulation budget) case of Proposition 4. While Chen et al. (2026) explicitly accounts for finite-m Monte Carlo error, their analysis does not derive a faster rate as m increases. Leveraging our localized Bernstein analysis, our result moves beyond fixed-budget bounds to explicitly quantify the structural improvement obtained from increasing m and yields a sharper rate in the growing-m regime. 

# 4.3 Comparison of Convergence Rates and Network Sizes 

Having established finite-sample guarantees for both belted and unbelted Engressions under standard H¨ older smoothness, we will quantify the theoretical advantages induced by our belt design. Specifically, we evaluate how this compress-then-generate paradigm improves the statistical efficiency and architectural complexity of conditional generation. 17 By Proposition 2, the Engression generator g∗ and the factorized representation ( s∗, h ∗)yield the same conditional law of Y given X. Since the Engression target is identified only through the conditional law it generates, the composite map ¯ g(x, e ) = h∗(s∗(x), e ) serves as a mathematically valid formulation for the full generator target g∗. The following proposition explicitly bounds the intrinsic smoothness of this composite map. 

Proposition 5. Suppose Assumptions 1 and 3 hold. Let ¯β = min {βs, β h}. Then each coordinate of the composite map ¯g(x, e ) = h∗(s∗(x), e ) is ¯β-H¨ older. 

Based on this smoothness result we next establish a rigorous theoretical comparison of Engression and Belted Engression by aligning the smoothness index βg in Assumption 6 with the composite smoothness bound ¯β.

Assumption 9. The Engression smoothness index in Assumption 6 and the smoothness indices of the belt s∗ and generator h∗ in Assumption 3 satisfy βg = min {βs, β h}.

While the neural network literature frequently assumes Lipschitz target functions (Shen et al. 2020, Tang & Li 2026), which corresponds to the restrictive setting of βg = βs =

βh = 1, our Assumption 9 is more general by permitting heterogeneous smoothness across components. The following example illustrates a concrete setting where Assumption 9 holds. 

Example 1. Suppose Y depends on X only through a linear transformation W ⊤X, where 

W ∈ Rp×d has full column rank. One may then naturally set s∗(x) = W ⊤x. In this scenario, 

βs can be taken to be arbitrarily large. Supplementary Proposition S.1 implies that the exact H¨ older exponents of g∗(x, e ) = h∗(W ⊤x, e ) and h∗ are equal. Hence, Assumption 9 holds. □

Theorem 2. Suppose Assumption 9 and the conditions of Proposition 4 and Theorem 1 hold. Then, the difference in rate exponents is strictly positive, i.e., ∆κ > 0, where 

∆κ =



(1 + κ)

 βs

2βs + p ∧ βh

2βh + d + q



∧

 βs

βs + p ∧ βh

βh + d + q

 | {z }

> Belted Engression exponent

−

 (1 + κ)βg

2βg + p + q ∧ βg

βg + p + q

| {z }

> Engression exponent

.

18 Theorem 2 compares the convergence rate of unbelted Engression in Proposition 4 with that of Belted Engression in Theorem 1 and shows that the latter converges faster. As in the discussion after Theorem 1 on Page 15, for classical structures where every coordinate of s∗ is β-H¨ older for every β > 0, the smoothness index βs can be taken to be arbitrarily large. Focusing on the regime κ ≥ 1, where the simulation budget is sufficiently large, the following corollary gives a simplified characterization of this statistical advantage. 

Corollary 1. Suppose the conditions of Theorem 2 hold and every coordinate of s∗ is β-H¨ older for every β > 0. If κ ≥ 1, then ∆κ = βh 

> βh+d+q

− βh 

> βh+p+q

> 0.

In view of Corollary 1, the upper-bound exponent for Belted Engression exceeds the upper-bound exponent for Engression by ∆ κ. Mathematically, this advantage arises because the belted architecture isolates the generative learning task to the dimension-reduced mani-fold ( s∗(X), η ) ∈ Rd+q rather than the ambient space ( X, η ) ∈ Rp+q. Under Assumption 9, the reduction in effective dimension ensures that the resulting bound remains sharper after accounting for the statistical cost of estimating the belt s∗.

Remark 5 (Robustness to over-specification) . This theoretical guarantee remains robust even if the true minimal sufficient dimension d0 is unknown. Any specified dimension d ≥ d0

still gives a sharper rate, provided that d < p and X Y | s∗(X). This result confirms that over-specification of the bottleneck does not invalidate our comparative advantages. 

Beyond statistical efficiency, we must also consider the architectural complexity required to attain these optimal bounds, measured by the total number of network parameters, namely Ss + Sh for Belted Engression and Sg for the Engression baseline. Define ρg(κ) = 

n(p+q)(1+ κ)2βg +p+q

o

∧

n p+qβg +p+q

o

, ρs(κ) = 

np(1+ κ)2βs+p

o

∧

n pβs+p

o

, and ρh(κ) = 

n(d+q)(1+ κ)2βh+d+q

o

∧

n d+qβh+d+q

o

.The following theorem bounds the relative size of these prescribed architectures. 

Theorem 3 (Network size comparison) . Suppose Assumption 9 and the conditions of Propo-sition 4 and Theorem 1 hold, and let m ≍ nκ for a fixed κ ≥ 0. For some constants c, C > 0

independent of n, m , the architectures prescribed by Proposition 4 and Theorem 1 satisfy: 

Sg ≥ c n ρg (κ)/(log n)2, and Ss + Sh ≤ C{nρs(κ) + nρh(κ)},

19 with ρs(κ) < ρ g(κ) and ρh(κ) < ρ g(κ). Consequently, we have: 

Ss + Sh

Sg

→ 0, as n → ∞ .

Theorem 3 reveals a structural benefit of Belted Engression: despite requiring the joint estimation of two distinct neural networks, their combined parameter-growth exponent is strictly smaller than that of the single unstructured network. As a result, the relative size of the belted architecture vanishes asymptotically. Analogous to Corollary 1, the following corollary provides a simplified characterization of this architectural reduction for arbitrarily smooth sufficient predictors in the regime κ ≥ 1. 

Corollary 2. Suppose the conditions of Theorem 3 hold. If every coordinate of s∗ is β-H¨ older for every β > 0 and κ ≥ 1, then, for some constants c, C > 0 independent of n, m ,the architectures prescribed by Proposition 4 and Theorem 1 satisfy: 

Sg ≥ c

(log n)2 n(p+q)/(βh+p+q), and Ss + Sh ≤ Cn (d+q)/(βh+d+q).

Consequently, we have: (Ss + Sh)/S g → 0 as n → ∞ .

Theorem 3 and Corollary 2 show that Belted Engression’s accelerated statistical rate is not an artifact of deploying a massively over-parameterized model class. To the contrary, it achieves superior statistical convergence while demanding a strictly smaller architecture with an asymptotically vanishing relative total parameter count. Thus, embedding the suf-ficient representational bottleneck simultaneously reduces the dimensionality of the ambient covariate space and compresses the required architectural complexity. 

# 5 Simulation Studies 

We evaluate the empirical performance of Belted Engression through two complementary lenses. First, we benchmark its conditional distribution estimation against the unstructured Engression baseline as the training sample size increases. Second, we assess the capacity of the learned belt to successfully recover the oracle low-dimensional sufficient predictor. 20 To ensure architectural robustness, we evaluate two distinct noise-injection strategies for the generative network. In the Single noise-layer design, one auxiliary noise vector is con-catenated with the predictor at the initial input layer. In the Multiple noise-layer design, independent auxiliary noise is injected into each hidden layer. For Belted Engression, the noise is introduced into the reduced generator h after the sufficient representational belt (see Supplementary Section S.3.1 for the corresponding network structure). Both designs are fully supported by our theoretical guarantees: the Single noise-layer design inherently operates as a ReLU generator on ( s(X), η ), while the Multiple noise-layer design can be equivalently analyzed as a ReLU generator on ( s(X), ˜η) after concatenating the finite se-quence of independent, layer-wise noises into a single composite noise vector ˜ η.We evaluate both the Engression baseline and our Belted Engression (abbreviated as Bengression in figures and tables) across three different data-generating configurations. In all scenarios, the ambient covariate is X ∼ Unif([0 , 2] 100 ), and the univariate response is generated via Y = f {s(X) + ε}, where the coordinates of the intrinsic noise ε are inde-pendent Unif( −√3, √3). We define the specific functional forms for three settings below: 

Sin : s(X) = (sin( πX 1), X 23 ) and f (u) = P2 

> j=1

uj ; Std : s(X) = ( X1, sd( X1, X 2, X 3)) and 

f (u) = P2 

> j=1

uj , where sd denotes the standard deviation; Cubic : s(X) = ( X1, X 2) and 

f (u) = P2 

> j=1

u3 

> j

/3. For the Sin and Std settings, the conditional law PY |X depends on 

X only through the scalar sum P2 

> j=1

sj (X), so the minimal sufficient dimension is exactly one. By setting d = 2 in our architecture, we deliberately over-specify the belt to empirically validate the theoretical robustness to over-specification discussed in Remark 5 of Section 4.3. Note that the intrinsic data-generating noise ε is two-dimensional and differs from the algorithmic generator noise η. For the latter, we over-parameterize the noise dimension to 

q = 100 in the implementation. Following Shen & Meinshausen (2025), the Multiple design uses an independent 100-dimensional noise vector at every hidden layer. To ensure a rigorous comparison, we conduct five-fold cross-validation at a baseline sample size of n = 1000 for every combination of data setting, method, and noise architecture. Models are evaluated using the empirical energy score from the training objective, com-puted via 100 conditionally generated samples per validation covariate. Our hyperparameter grid searches over the total depth D, hidden width W , learning rate, training iterations, and, 21 specifically for Belted Engression, the belt depth Ds; see Supplementary Table S.1. To guar-antee convergence at each scale, the optimization hyperparameters (i.e., learning rate and training iterations) are tuned separately for each n via the same five-fold cross-validation. The final evaluation draws 500 independent test covariates and generates 500 conditional samples per test covariate. We assess the conditional generation using three metrics: Mean Squared Error (MSE), computed as n−1eval 

P 

> i

∥ˆμ(Xi) − μ(Xi)∥2, where ˆ μ(Xi) is the generated conditional mean and μ(Xi) is the Monte Carlo approximation of the true conditional mean; Squared Energy Distance (ED 2): the empirical squared energy-distance statistic comparing the generated conditional samples to the true conditional samples; Empirical Coverage: the proportion of true conditional samples falling within the 95% empirical prediction interval (bounded by the 2.5% and 97.5% empirical quantiles) of the generated samples at the same covariate value. Lower MSE and ED 2 indicate superior distributional accuracy, while the empirical coverage should be compared with the nominal 0.95 level. Table 1: The conditional generation performance for the Sin setting. Rows compare Belted Engression against the Engression baseline across varying sample sizes ( n) and noise-layer designs (Single vs. Multiple). Reported values represent empirical means evaluated over 100 independent replicates, with Monte Carlo standard errors provided in parentheses.               

> nMethod MSE ED 2Empirical Coverage Single Multiple Single Multiple Single Multiple 1000 Engression 1.219(0.009) 1.096(0.011) 0.576(0.004) 0.426(0.004) 0.684(0.002) 0.835(0.002) Bengression 0.556(0.005) 0.552(0.005) 0.205(0.002) 0.202(0.002) 0.932(0.001) 0.932(0.001) 5000 Engression 0.629(0.006) 0.433(0.006) 0.248(0.002) 0.160(0.002) 0.898(0.001) 0.961(0.001) Bengression 0.340(0.004) 0.336(0.004) 0.126(0.001) 0.124(0.001) 0.949(0.001) 0.953(0.001) 10000 Engression 0.663(0.006) 0.476(0.005) 0.269(0.002) 0.176(0.002) 0.883(0.001) 0.953(0.001) Bengression 0.214(0.008) 0.210(0.007) 0.082(0.003) 0.080(0.003) 0.943(0.002) 0.951(0.002)

Tables 1–3 report the MSE, ED 2, and empirical coverage for the Sin, Std, and Cubic configurations, respectively, tracking both Engression and Belted Engression as the training sample size n increases. These results demonstrate that embedding the sufficient represen-tational bottleneck improves conditional distribution learning when the response depends on an underlying low-dimensional sufficient predictor. Across all three settings and both noise-layer designs, Belted Engression achieves substantial reductions in both MSE and ED 2

relative to Engression. Belted Engression tends to effectively mitigate the performance gap 22 between the Single and Multiple noise-layer designs that plagues standard Engression. For the Engression baseline, the Single noise-layer design consistently underperforms. This em-pirical pattern suggests that algorithmic noise injected solely at the input layer is difficult for the network to leverage effectively when forced to simultaneously process the full ambient covariate vector. However, once the belt compresses the covariates into a low-dimensional sufficient representation, the Single design becomes competitive with the Multiple design. Table 2: The conditional generation performance for the Std setting. Rows compare Belted Engression against the Engression baseline across varying sample sizes ( n) and noise-layer designs (Single vs. Multiple). Reported values represent empirical means evaluated over 100 independent replicates, with Monte Carlo standard errors provided in parentheses.               

> nMethod MSE ED 2Empirical Coverage Single Multiple Single Multiple Single Multiple 1000 Engression 0.950(0.008) 0.694(0.008) 0.454(0.003) 0.286(0.003) 0.739(0.002) 0.853(0.003) Bengression 0.304(0.005) 0.308(0.005) 0.115(0.002) 0.115(0.002) 0.938(0.001) 0.940(0.001) 5000 Engression 0.282(0.004) 0.165(0.006) 0.123(0.001) 0.060(0.002) 0.905(0.001) 0.964(0.001) Bengression 0.103(0.002) 0.103(0.002) 0.039(0.001) 0.038(0.001) 0.953(0.002) 0.956(0.001) 10000 Engression 0.266(0.003) 0.204(0.003) 0.116(0.001) 0.079(0.001) 0.908(0.001) 0.950(0.002) Bengression 0.076(0.001) 0.076(0.001) 0.028(0.001) 0.028(0.000) 0.957(0.001) 0.959(0.001)

Table 3: The conditional generation performance for the Cubic setting. Rows compare Belted Engression against the Engression baseline across varying sample sizes ( n) and noise-layer designs (Single vs. Multiple). Reported values represent empirical means evaluated over 100 independent replicates, with Monte Carlo standard errors provided in parentheses.               

> nMethod MSE ED 2Empirical Coverage Single Multiple Single Multiple Single Multiple 1000 Engression 5.434(0.056) 4.966(0.093) 1.023(0.007) 0.797(0.010) 0.763(0.002) 0.847(0.002) Bengression 2.150(0.034) 1.918(0.026) 0.325(0.004) 0.349(0.004) 0.951(0.001) 0.940(0.001) 5000 Engression 1.658(0.030) 1.667(0.059) 0.287(0.004) 0.224(0.006) 0.934(0.001) 0.980(0.001) Bengression 0.640(0.013) 0.617(0.012) 0.104(0.002) 0.105(0.002) 0.970(0.001) 0.976(0.001) 10000 Engression 1.737(0.024) 1.867(0.047) 0.297(0.003) 0.259(0.004) 0.922(0.001) 0.970(0.001) Bengression 0.416(0.005) 0.407(0.005) 0.070(0.001) 0.072(0.001) 0.972(0.001) 0.978(0.000)

We also examine the empirical network size required to achieve optimal performance over a fixed architectural grid (see Supplementary Table S.2). Using the same settings and evaluation metrics, Figure 2 pools the Single and Multiple noise-layer designs to report the minimum parameter count necessary to attain a predefined performance threshold. For MSE 23 and ED 2, this threshold is defined as falling within 10% of the best value achieved for that specific setting; for empirical coverage, the target is bounded within the interval [0 .94 , 0.96]. Across different settings and metrics, Belted Engression consistently reaches these target thresholds utilizing a substantially smaller network than Engression. This empirical efficiency validates the architectural complexity bounds mathematically proven in Section 4.3. 

Figure 2: Minimum network size required to attain predefined performance thresholds across simulation settings and evaluation metrics. For MSE and ED 2, the target is bounded within 10% of the optimal value achieved for that specific setting, and for empirical coverage, the target interval is [0 .94 , 0.96]. Finally, we compare the learned SDR representation with two established SDR baselines: GSIR (Li 2018), implemented with a Gaussian kernel, and BENN (Tang & Li 2026). For each method, we compute the distance correlation between the estimated representation and the oracle sufficient predictor, where a larger distance correlation indicates better recovery of the underlying low-dimensional feature. Recall that the true sufficient predictors are sin( πX 1) + X23 for the Sin setting, X1 + sd( X1, X 2, X 3) for the Std setting, and ( X1, X 2)for the Cubic setting. Figure 3 visualizes these distance correlations across varying sample sizes, evaluated on 500 test samples and averaged over 100 independent replicates. For Belted Engression, we only report the Single noise design, as both noise architectures yield virtually identical SDR recovery. For BENN, we use a Gaussian kernel function class as the ensemble with an ensemble size of mBENN = 100. Empirically, Belted Engression demonstrates highly competitive representation learning: it achieves robust recovery in the Sin setting, matches GSIR while outperforming BENN at larger sample sizes in the Std setting, and strictly overtakes both baselines in the Cubic setting for n ≥ 1000. These results confirm the efficacy of the belted architecture. The same objective used to train the conditional generator also 24 extracts an SDR summary aligned with the true low-dimensional structure of the covariates. 

Figure 3: Empirical recovery of the sufficient representation across simulation settings and training sample sizes. Each panel reports the distance correlation between the estimated representation and the oracle sufficient predictor, with shaded ribbons indicating ±1 Monte Carlo standard error evaluated over 100 independent replicates. 

# 6 Applications 

To demonstrate the practical utility and versatility, we evaluate Belted Engression across two real-world domains: conditional distribution estimation of community crime rates in Section 6.1 and conditional image completion on the MNIST dataset in Section 6.2. 

# 6.1 Conditional Distribution Estimation of Crime Rates 

We first demonstrate the application of Belted Engression on the Communities and Crime data from the UCI Machine Learning Repository ( https://archive.ics.uci.edu/dataset/ 183 ). This dataset comprises 102 numeric features capturing community-level demographic, socioeconomic, housing, and law-enforcement attributes to model the normalized violent-crime rate per population, which is a critical task in the statistical analysis of violent crime (see, e.g., Loeffler et al. 2026). The primary statistical task is to estimate the conditional distribution of this crime-rate response given the ambient community covariates. We use the curated dataset from the R package fairml and impute missing feature values using the training-set medians. Since the normalized response lies within [0 , 1], all 25 models are fitted on the logit scale following a truncation of the response to [10 −4, 1 − 10 −4]. The data are partitioned into 1312 training observations and 657 test observations. Model hyperparameters are selected via five-fold cross-validation, employing the energy score on the logit-transformed response as the validation criterion, where the tuning grid and related settings are reported in Supplementary Table S.3. Final out-of-sample test metrics are averaged across 10 independent replicate fits. Table 4: Out-of-sample predictive performance on the Communities and Crime dataset. Belted Engression is benchmarked against Engression across the Multiple and Single noise-layer designs. Model size denotes the total number of trainable parameters, reported in thousands ( k) and rounded to one decimal place. Performance metrics include logit-scale MSE, logit-scale ED 2, and empirical 95% prediction-interval coverage. Noise Architecture Method Model Size MSE (logit) ED 2 (logit) Coverage Multiple Engression 45.8k 214.120 1.281 0.933 Bengression 16.8k 191.274 1.231 0.943 Single Engression 11.1k 207.031 1.232 0.903 Bengression 5.9k 191.343 1.220 0.926 Table 4 reports the logit-scale MSE, logit-scale ED 2, and empirical 95% prediction-interval coverage. Across both noise-injection architectures, Belted Engression yields lower MSE and ED 2 compared to Engression, while achieving an empirical coverage closer to the nominal 0.95 level. Belted Engression secures these predictive improvements while demand-ing fewer trainable parameters. These results confirm that the SDR belt continues to reduce distributional error and improve prediction in real-world observational settings containing over 100 ambient covariates, mirroring the structural advantages demonstrated in Section 5. Figure 4 visualizes the extracted one-dimensional SDR representation evaluated on the test set for Belted Engression, BENN, and GSIR. To facilitate this visual comparison, both Belted Engression and BENN are configured with a bottleneck dimension of d = 1. Each panel plots the fitted one-dimensional representation against the observed violent-crime re-sponse. The reported ρ value denotes the out-of-sample Pearson correlation on the test set, with the corresponding standard error shown in parentheses. Because a one-dimensional SDR subspace is invariant to orientation, the sign of ρ is not intrinsically meaningful, but its magnitude quantifies how effectively the learned representation captures the variation in 26 Figure 4: Visualization of the one-dimensional SDR representations evaluated on the Com-munities and Crime test set. Each panel scatters the extracted sufficient predictor against the observed violent-crime response for Belted Engression, BENN, and GSIR. The displayed 

ρ denotes the out-of-sample Pearson correlation between the learned representation and the response, with the corresponding standard error shown in parentheses. the response. Belted Engression demonstrates an association strength comparable to BENN and strictly superior to GSIR, while simultaneously delivering the superior predictive met-rics detailed in Table 4. Thus, Belted Engression successfully unifies accurate conditional estimation with the extraction of an informative low-dimensional structural summary. 

# 6.2 Conditional Image Completion on MNIST 

We examine a conditional sampling task using MNIST handwritten digits. Each image is split into an observed upper half and an unobserved lower half: the covariate X ∈ [0 , 1] 392 

contains the upper 14 rows of the 28 × 28 image, and the response Y ∈ [0 , 1] 392 contains the lower 14 rows. The statistical task is to learn the conditional distribution of the missing lower half given the observed upper half, with conditional samples representing possible completions. This setting tests the utility of the SDR belt: while the ambient pixel space is large, the intrinsic information required for accurate completion is expected to concentrate strictly on low-dimensional digit features. We train both Engression and Belted Engression on a balanced training sample of 8,000 MNIST images spanning all 10 digits. For training stability, the target lower-half pixels v are binarized at 0.2, replacing each with 1{v > 0.2}. Also, the generator output uses a sigmoid activation σ(t) = 1 /(1 + e−t) to ensure the generated pixels are properly bounded to the image domain. The architectural specifications are provided in Supplementary Table S.4. 27 Figure 5 compares the conditionally sampled completions from both methods. The first column of each panel displays the ground-truth image, while subsequent columns present independent conditional samples generated by fixing the upper half. Although both methods learn digit-specific conditional distributions, the completions produced by Belted Engression exhibit greater visual coherence and structural fidelity in the generated lower half. 

Figure 5: Conditional image completions on the MNIST test set. In each panel, the first column gives the ground-truth test image, while subsequent columns give independent condi-tional samples generated by fixing the same upper half. The dotted horizontal line separates the observed upper-half conditioning covariates from the generated lower-half response. Beyond generative accuracy, the embedded belt gives an interpretable low-dimensional summary of the completion task. Figure 6 plots two specific coordinates from the 10-dimensional SDR bottleneck extracted by Belted Engression on the test set. These coordi-nates are selected based on their marginal correlations with two coarse digit-shape groups: line-like digits {1, 4, 7, 9} and loop-like digits {0, 6}. The resulting representation separates these groups from the remaining digits, despite the Belted Engression loss function never having access to the categorical digit labels. Thus, the belt learned for conditional gen-eration also organizes the ambient covariate space according to the shape features driving the completion task. In this complex image-completion scenario, Belted Engression gen-erates conditional samples for a multivariate, 392-dimensional response while concurrently extracting an SDR representation endowed with morphological structure. 28 Figure 6: Visualization of the SDR extracted by Belted Engression on the MNIST test set. Each point is a test image projected onto two selected coordinates of the learned 10-dimensional SDR bottleneck. Digit labels were withheld during model training and are used only to select these coordinates and color the scatterplot, highlighting the morphological separation between line-like digits {1, 4, 7, 9}, loop-like digits {0, 6}, and other digits. 

# 7 Conclusion 

This paper introduces Belted Engression by integrating a sufficient dimension reduction (SDR) bottleneck into the generative architecture of the neural network Engression. Theo-retically, we establish that the SDR condition is equivalent to a law-preserving factorization of the conditional distribution, and our localized finite-sample analysis yields unified conver-gence rates for both methods under fixed and growing network budgets. Under comparable conditions with the unbelted counterpart, Belted Engression achieves a sharper upper-bound exponent for its convergence rate, and its prescribed architectures are substantially smaller, yielding an asymptotically vanishing relative parameter count. Empirically, simulations con-firm that our structure accelerates conditional distribution learning and improves SDR re-covery with fewer parameters. Finally, our applications to crime rates and MNIST image completion demonstrate that the extracted belt can effectively exploit low-dimensional in-trinsic geometry in conditional generation without compromising the population target. 29 References 

Bartlett, P. L., Bousquet, O. & Mendelson, S. (2005), ‘Local rademacher complexities’, The Annals of Statistics 33 (4), 1497–1537. Bartlett, P. L. & Mendelson, S. (2006), ‘Empirical minimization’, Probability Theory and Related Fields 135 (3), 311–334. Bengio, Y., Courville, A. & Vincent, P. (2013), ‘Representation learning: A review and new perspectives’, IEEE Transactions on Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence 

35 (8), 1798–1828. Chai, J., Fan, J. & Gu, Y. (2026), ‘Neural generative distributional regression’, arXiv preprint arXiv:2605.02062 .Chen, J., Guo, Z. & Shen, X. (2026), ‘Error analysis of neural-network-based Engression’, 

arXiv preprint arXiv:2607.27723 .Cook, R. D. (1998), Regression Graphics: Ideas for Studying Regressions Through Graphics ,Wiley Series in Probability and Statistics, John Wiley & Sons, New York. Cook, R. D. & Weisberg, S. (1991), ‘Sliced inverse regression for dimension reduction: Com-ment’, Journal of the American Statistical Association 86 (414), 328–332. Davidian, M. & Giltinan, D. M. (2003), ‘Nonlinear models for repeated measurement data: an overview and update’, Journal of Agricultural, Biological, and Environmental Statistics 

8(4), 387. Fan, J. & Lv, J. (2008), ‘Sure independence screening for ultrahigh dimensional feature space’, Journal of the Royal Statistical Society Series B 70 (5), 849–911. Fan, J., Xue, L. & Yao, J. (2017), ‘Sufficient forecasting using factor models’, Journal of Econometrics 201 (2), 292–306. Goodfellow, I., Pouget-Abadie, J., Mirza, M., Xu, B., Warde-Farley, D., Ozair, S., Courville, A. & Bengio, Y. (2014), Generative adversarial nets, in ‘Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems’, Vol. 27. Huang, J., Xu, G. & Zhu, J. (2026), ‘Theoretical analysis of engression and reverse markov engression’, arXiv preprint arXiv:2606.01002 .Jiao, Y., Shen, G., Lin, Y. & Huang, J. (2023), ‘Deep nonparametric regression on approxi-mate manifolds: Nonasymptotic error bounds with polynomial prefactors’, The Annals of Statistics 51 (2), 691–716. Kingma, D. P. & Welling, M. (2014), Auto-encoding variational bayes, in ‘International Conference on Learning Representations’. 30 Kraft, B., Stalder, S., Aeberhard, W. H., Ruiz, N. H., Meinshausen, N., Shen, X. & Gud-mundsson, L. (2026), ‘Modeling uncertainty with engression: A deep generative time-series approach’, Geophysical Research Letters 53 (2), e2025GL120122. Lee, K.-Y., Li, B. & Chiaromonte, F. (2013), ‘A general theory for nonlinear sufficient dimension reduction: Formulation and estimation’, The Annals of Statistics 41 (1), 221– 249. Li, B. (2018), Sufficient Dimension Reduction: Methods and Applications with R , CRC Press. Li, B. & Song, J. (2017), ‘Nonlinear sufficient dimension reduction for functional data’, The Annals of Statistics 45 (3), 1059–1095. Li, K.-C. (1991), ‘Sliced inverse regression for dimension reduction’, Journal of the American Statistical Association 86 (414), 316–327. Lin, W. & Kulasekera, K. (2007), ‘Identifiability of single-index models and additive-index models’, Biometrika 94 (2), 496–501. Loeffler, C., Rosenberger, J. L. & Xue, L. (2026), Gun Violence: The Statistical Issues , CRC Press. Nelder, J. A. & Wedderburn, R. W. (1972), ‘Generalized linear models’, Journal of the Royal Statistical Society Series A 135 (3), 370–384. Roweis, S. T. & Saul, L. K. (2000), ‘Nonlinear dimensionality reduction by locally linear embedding’, Science 290 (5500), 2323–2326. Scott, D. W. (2015), Multivariate Density Estimation: Theory, Practice, and Visualization ,Wiley. Shen, X. & Meinshausen, N. (2024), ‘Distributional principal autoencoders’, arXiv preprint arXiv:2404.13649 .Shen, X. & Meinshausen, N. (2025), ‘Engression: extrapolation through the lens of distri-butional regression’, Journal of the Royal Statistical Society Series B 87 (3), 653–677. Shen, Z., Yang, H. & Zhang, S. (2020), ‘Deep network approximation characterized by number of neurons’, Communications in Computational Physics 28 (5), 1768–1811. Song, S., Wang, T., Shen, G., Lin, Y. & Huang, J. (2026), ‘Wasserstein generative regression’, 

Journal of the Royal Statistical Society Series B 88 (1), 330–351. Sz´ ekely, G. J. & Rizzo, M. L. (2013), ‘Energy statistics: A class of statistics based on distances’, Journal of Statistical Planning and Inference 143 (8), 1249–1272. Tang, Y. & Li, B. (2026), ‘Belted and ensembled neural network for linear and nonlinear sufficient dimension reduction’, Journal of the American Statistical Association pp. 1–12. 31 von K¨ ugelgen, J., Shen, X., Ketterer, J., Meinshausen, N. & Peters, J. (2025), Representation learning for distributional perturbation extrapolation, in ‘Learning Meaningful Represen-tations of Life (LMRL) Workshop at ICLR 2025’. Xu, S., Yu, Z. & Huang, J. (2025), ‘On conditional stochastic interpolation for generative nonlinear sufficient dimension reduction’, arXiv preprint arXiv:2512.18971 .Zhang, Q., Li, B. & Xue, L. (2024b), ‘Nonlinear sufficient dimension reduction for distribution-on-distribution regression’, Journal of Multivariate Analysis 202 , 105302. Zhang, Q., Xue, L. & Li, B. (2024a), ‘Dimension reduction for Fr´ echet regression’, Journal of the American Statistical Association 119 (548), 2733–2747. 32