Title: Loss-Resilient Semantic Communication over Packet-Loss Networks at Extreme-Low Bandwidth

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2608.19590v1

Published Time: Fri, 21 Aug 2026 00:22:52 GMT

Number of Pages: 14

Markdown Content:
> 1

# Loss-Resilient Semantic Communication over Packet-Loss Networks at Extreme-Low Bandwidth 

Shengshi Yao, Member, IEEE , Jincheng Dai, Member, IEEE , Sixian Wang, Member, IEEE ,Guo Lu, Member, IEEE , Kai Niu, Member, IEEE , Wenjun Xu, Senior Member, IEEE ,Wenjun Zhang, Fellow, IEEE , and Ping Zhang, Fellow, IEEE 

Abstract —In extreme-low bandwidth network scenarios, gen-erative semantic codecs have emerged as promising solutions to reduce bandwidth cost for visual communications. However, these learned codecs are usually optimized solely for compres-sion efficiency and thus not robust against transmission errors. Corruptions due to packet-loss among these highly compact generative latent representations often cause more critical degra-dation in fidelity and realism, intensified by the severe error propagation across the latent contexts and multi-step decoding process. In this paper, we propose “ ResiGLC ”, a novel loss-resilient generative latent coding framework designed for robust semantic communication over extreme-low bandwidth packet-loss networks. Motivated by the inherent goal-consistency between generation and compression, we sufficiently exploit the impressive in-context predictive capabilities of language models. Integrated with the masked learning strategy, our model supports arbitrary context modeling of latent codes, which could mitigate the error propagation and handle unpredictable packet loss patterns. At the receiver, a progressive resilient decoding pipeline is presented, which leverages both the contextual relationship of the latent codes and the multi-modal semantic prior in the generative latent space, separately. By jointly optimizing toward both compression efficiency and packet-loss resilience, our proposed progressive decoding mechanism offers graceful performance when dealing with dynamic packet losses. Through extensive experimental evaluations, we establish that under packet-loss network conditions, ResiGLC can effectively improve the loss-resilience in terms of perceptual fidelity and realism qualities with extreme-low bandwidth cost. 

Index Terms —Loss-resilient codec, semantic communication, packet-loss wireless networks, extreme-low bandwidth, generative modeling. 

I. I NTRODUCTION 

# ROBUST visual communication remains a critical chal-lenge, as conventional systems struggle to deliver a con-sistently plausible Quality of Experience (QoE) under severe 

This work was supported in part by the National Key Research and Development Program of China under Grant 2024YFF0509700, in part by the National Natural Science Foundation of China under Grant 62371063, Grant 62471290, Grant 62501075, and Grant 92467301, in part by the Beijing Natural Science Foundation under Grant L232047, in part by Postdoctoral Fellowship Program of CPSF under Grant Number GZB20250810, in part by China Postdoctoral Science Foundation under Grant Number 2025M783515, and in part by the Beijing Nova Program. ( Corresponding author: Jincheng Dai. )Shengshi Yao, Jincheng Dai, Kai Niu, Wenjun Xu and Ping Zhang are with Beijing University of Posts and Telecommunications, Beijing 100876, China (e-mail: daijincheng@bupt.edu.cn). Sixian Wang, Guo Lu and Wenjun Zhang are with Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai 200240, China. Open-source code and data are available on-line at: https://github.com/ semcomm/ResiGLC. 

network conditions. The problem is particularly pronounced in scenarios such as deep-sea, deep-space telemetry, and emer-gency communications, where the available wireless network bandwidth is extremely limited and the network conditions are highly dynamic and volatile [1]. This necessitates a paradigm shift toward one-shot content delivery frameworks. Taking image communication as a case study, conventional image codecs optimized toward minimizing pixel-wise dis-tortion [2]–[4] typically operate in the mid-to-high bitrate regime ( > 0.15 bits per pixel (bpp)). These codecs tend to produce blurring and artifacts as the bitrate decreases. There-fore, in extreme-low to low bandwidth scenarios (typically 

< 0.15 bpp), generative compression has been recognized as the general approach to reduce the bandwidth consumption while also ensuring high fidelity. Motivated by Generative Adversarial Networks (GAN) [5] and diffusion models [6], generative image codecs [7]–[10], often referred to as per-ceptual image codecs , learn to enhance the perceptual quality with significantly fewer bits. They achieve better perceptual quality and rate efficiency at the cost of higher distortion. With the objective of high-realism and high-fidelity at low bitrate, generative latent coding (GLC) has been emerging as a dominant paradigm that performs transform coding at either quantized [11] or continuous [10] generative latent space to align with human perception. This allows noticeable bitrate savings by leveraging the latent prior. These promising works have catalyzed the development of image semantic communications over extreme bandwidth-limited channels. While the employment of generative image codecs inevitably introduces evident computational complexity at the decoder, this paradigm fits these applications, which are fundamentally featured by asymmetric computational resources. Specifically, the transmitters are often severely resource-constrained de-vices, such as autonomous underwater vehicles, whereas the receivers are typically ground stations equipped with abundant computational resources. However, existing generative image codecs are typically developed under the assumption of error-free network trans-mission. To mitigate potential transmission errors, these codecs typically resort to application- or transport-layer error con-trol mechanisms. Among them, Automatic Repeat reQuest (ARQ) and Forward Error Correction (FEC) coding [12]–[14] are widely used. On one hand, ARQ serves as a reactive mechanism initiated by the receiver, by sending a feedback signal for retransmission. Nevertheless, in the aforementioned extreme environments, the inherently long round-trip times arXiv:2608.19590v1 [eess.IV] 20 Aug 2026 2

(RTTs) render retransmission latency non-deterministic and prohibitive. On the other hand, the effect of FEC, as aproactive error correction mechanism, is correlated with the proportion of redundancy, in which case the sender needs to estimate the packet loss ratio in advance. Otherwise, it risks either allocating excessive redundancy or suffering decoding failures that still necessitate retransmission. More critically, the transmission overhead of FEC becomes unaffordable under extreme-low bandwidth conditions. Parallel to ensuring reli-able transmission of compressed source data, Joint Source-Channel Coding (JSCC) has emerged as a distinct branch of research for robust transmission. Mapping source data directly to transmitted symbols via deep neural networks, deep JSCC [15], [16] shows prospects in improving end-to-end transmission performance. However, its deployment faces fundamental compatibility hurdles with existing standardized digital communication systems. Therefore, there exists a pressing need for novel coding paradigms that offer inherent resilience within bandwidth-limited and volatile environments [17], [18]. Compared to the aforementioned mechanisms, this paper advances packet loss concealment (PLC), a passive error control mechanism, for generative image codecs, which strikes a balance between compression efficiency and loss-resilience. It thereby ensures a more deterministic latency by minimizing the reliance on latency-inducing retransmissions, and also circumvents exces-sive FEC redundancy in the event of unpredictable packet loss. Specifically, the challenges for the generative image codecs to accomplish the error-resilience in bandwidth-limited sce-narios are twofold: 1) Extreme utilization of the contextual dependencies among latent codes may result in severe error propagation in the event of packet loss. The eventual image reconstruction quality is highly sensitive to packet loss, exhibiting a pronounced cliff effect (illustrated by the gray curves in Fig. 1). 2) Perceptual codecs that employ a conditional generative model generally premise on access to complete and precise knowledge of the conditions. Transmission error leads to incomplete conditions, which undermines content consistency. More critically, it may hinder the genera-tion process, preventing samples from converging to the learned manifold where realistic data resides. This paper proposes ResiGLC , a novel error-resilient gen-erative latent coding framework. It operates as a multi-modal semantic transmission framework that conveys both compact image features and global textual semantics. To address the aforementioned challenges, rather than exhaustively exploiting contextual dependencies for extreme compression, we strate-gically preserve partial contextual redundancy at the sender. It mitigates error propagation while maintaining a favorable balance with compression efficiency. Motivated by masked modeling strategies [19], [20], a masked modeling Trans-former (MMT) is designed to achieve arbitrary contextual modeling . The multi-modal scheme further bolsters resilience, enabling robust reconstruction provided that any modality of condition signals is available. In worst cases where all Perceptual  Fidelity  ↑   

> Packet Loss Ratio
> Existing resilient
> codec
> Perceptual image
> codec + FEC
> Perceptual  Realism  ↑
> Existing resilient
> codec
> Perceptual image
> codec + FEC
> Packet Loss Ratio
> Fig. 1. An example of loss resilience in terms of perceptual fidelity and realism under different loss ratios, where the upward arrow “ ↑” indicates that higher value of the metric is favorable. The figures are illustrative, and more results as well as the analysis can be found in Section IV.

latent codes are unrecoverable, the text description alone still yields semantically consistent and perceptually plausible reconstructions. In other cases, the fidelity will be further en-hanced with more latent codes received. To prevent incomplete conditions from driving the generation off the diffusion prior, we introduce a progressive resilient decoding mechanism at the receiver. Instead of directly exposing incomplete latent codes to the diffusion model, the receiver first leverages the learned contextual prior to predict the lost latent codes. Subsequently, the restored codes act as conditions to guide the token sequence generation in the generative latent space for image synthesis. A corresponding multi-phase training strategy is devised to optimize this pipeline. We verify the performance advantages of ResiGLC under diverse packet-loss channel setups, including random packet loss traces as well as Markovian channel loss traces as the composite of realistic channels. Results demonstrate that the proposed ResiGLC strikes a commendable balance between ef-ficiency and resilience against packet loss. In contrast to FEC-based strategy, ResiGLC does not presume any knowledge or estimation of packet loss at the sender. Its progressive resilient decoding ensures graceful degradation in terms of perceptual fidelity and realism, without the need for retransmission or extra redundancy. Existing resilient image codecs are mostly distortion-oriented, e.g., [21], [22], which struggle to maintain perceptual quality at extreme-low bandwidth cost (the blue curves in Fig. 1). We highlight the attractive properties of our 

ResiGLC compared to existing perceptual or resilient codecs in Fig. 1. Please refer to Section IV for more numerical results. The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. In the next section, we briefly review the related work on low-bitrate image codecs and classical error-resilience techniques. Section III presents the framework design and stage-wise de-coding pipeline of ResiGLC . Section IV presents experiments on our proposed method to illustrate the performance gain, comparing with perceptual image codecs and existing resilient image codecs. Finally, Section V concludes the paper. 

Notational Conventions: Thin letters (e.g., x) denote scalars, lowercase bold letters (e.g., x) denote vectors, and uppercase bold letters (e.g., X) denote matrices. Calligraphic letters (e.g., 

X ) are used to denote sets or loss functions. p(x) denotes the probability density function (PDF) of a random variable x.

N (μ, σ 2) represents the Gaussian distribution with mean μ

and variance σ2. E[·] denotes the mathematical expectation, 3

and N+ represents the set of positive integers. Furthermore, the diacritics ˆx and ˇx typically signify quantized/decoded variables and predicted variables, respectively. II. R ELATED WORK 

A. Image Codecs toward Extreme-Low Bitrate 

Learned Image Compression (LIC) methods using neural networks have shown superior performance over traditional methods such as BPG [2]. One of the most trending LIC frameworks exploits variational auto-encoder (VAE) to reg-ularize the distribution of latent features, whose context is modeled by an entropy model [3], [4]. These codecs are optimized using a Lagrange objective as 

L = λD + R, (1) where D quantifies the distortion, e.g., the mean squared error of two images MSE (x, ˆx), λ is the weighting factor. However, in the low-bitrate regime, the information loss is severe, and the reconstructions exhibit mode averaging behavior, degrad-ing visual quality for humans. To mitigate this phenomenon, perceptual loss DP , as a complement of (1), is adopted to regularize feature-wise distance, e.g., LPIPS [23]. It results in a rate-distortion-perception (RDP) function 

L = λP DP + λD + R, (2) which relaxes the constraint of low-level distortion. The ad-versarial training using GAN [7], [8] encourages the codecs to generate details alike to real images, enhancing perceptual 

realism . MS-ILLM [8] introduced a non-binary discriminator conditioned on local image representations, significantly im-proving the realism of generative compression. Some works employed more powerful diffusion models as generative mod-els [9], [10], [24]. The key challenge of these generative image codecs lies in the fidelity to the original image (reference-based distance), despite good realism which mathematically correlates to sta-tistical feature distance. Codecs that generate images from scratch or from text [25] compromise the image fidelity despite extreme-low bitrate. Blau et al. [26] explain this phenomenon by highlighting a fundamental trade-off between perceptual quality and distortion. Technically, DiffEIC [9] exploits the generative capability of pre-trained diffusion models and in-jects guidance to improve fidelity. GLC [10], [11] employs a human-perception aligned generative latent space of VAE or vector-quantized VAE [27], trading fidelity for better percep-tual realism at extreme-low bitrates. 

B. Error-Resilience Techniques 

To transmit highly-compact image representations, various approaches have been developed to enhance the robustness against random data errors and erasures, including forward error correction (FEC), packet loss concealment (PLC) and joint source-channel coding (JSCC). 1) Forward error correction (FEC) is a fundamental method used to protect the compressed bitstream from transmission errors. It works by adding redundancy to the data at the sender side, either at the application or transport layer. Specifically, FEC encodes Nk data packets and adds Nr parity packets, such that the original data packets can be recovered if any subset of Nk(1 + r) packets out of the total (Nk + Nr )

packets are received. r denotes the redundancy ratio required for correct data recovery. Common FEC codes include Reed-Solomon codes in storage systems, and fountain codes in multimedia broadcasting [12]. However, the potentially in-adequate redundancy in environments worse than expected causes transmission breakdown, while excessive redundancy compromises efficiency. Valin et al. [13] investigated low bitrate redundancy coding in speech coding to reduce the FEC overhead. Learning-based FEC strategies [14] have been pro-posed to adaptively select redundancy level for different video frames based on channel conditions. These works partially mitigate the limitations of traditional FEC concerning both efficiency and effectiveness. However, FEC cannot guarantee perfect recovery, as its effectiveness breaks down under severe dynamic packet loss. 2) Packet Loss Concealment (PLC) is a long-lasting topic in media transmission. A common category of PLC is re-dundancy coding, which has been widely applied in speech coding [28]. Different from the parity check in FEC, it encapsulates partial but key content in adjacent data packets to maintain a minimum quality of reconstruction. However, the concealment also fails if both the data and redundancy are lost. In recent years, data-driven PLC methods using neural networks have been developed [21], [22], [29]–[31] for resilient audio and image coding. PLC is either integrated within the codec or implemented after the decoding, exploiting the inherent correlation of data to predict the missing data (features). Nevertheless, we find that the resilience struggles in balancing the fidelity and perceptual realism at low bandwidth cost. 3) Joint Source-Channel Coding (JSCC) is another active area of research toward resilient transmission, which directly maps source data to transmitted symbols. Existing studies have demonstrated significant robustness against lossy communi-cation channels and superior end-to-end coding gain due to joint source-channel processing [15], [16]. Digital modulation methods on top of JSCC have been proposed to enhance the compatibility with current digital communication systems [18], [32]. However, the strong coupling behaviour between physical layer and application layer, and the protocol mismatch hinders the practical deployment of JSCC. In summary, to fill the gap of resilient image coding at extreme-low bandwidths within current digital communication systems, exploring inherent resilience for a low-bitrate codec is a critical necessity to handle inevitable packet loss. III. M ETHOD 

This paper presents a novel error-resilient generative se-mantic communication framework that incorporates generative modeling of latent space in handling lossy transmission in bandwidth-limited scenarios. 4Generative     

> Latent Space
> Pixel Space
> Latent Code
> Space
> Conditions
> Latent Code
> Space
> : Trainable : Frozen
> : Image caption transmission : Image token transmission
> Generative Decoding
> Textual
> semantics
> Concealed latent
> codes
> Packet-loss Wireless
> Networks
> Decoding
> Generative latent representation Image token/caption transmission Progressive resilient latent decoding
> A white lighthouse stands on a grassy hill beside a building.
> Comcealment
> steps
> Bit
> sequence Token
> sequence

Image Captioning  Text Encoder  Conditional 

Latent Generator 

De-Tokenizer 

Masked Modeling Transformer 

Latent-Domain 

Transform 

> PDF

Tokenizer  

> Fig. 2. Overview of ResiGLC. Two data streams are compressed and transmitted, including textual semantics and the latent codes extracted from the token sequence in generative latent space. The Masked Modeling Transformer (MMT) models the contextual dependencies of latent codes, which are exploited for both entropy coding (produce probabilistic density function (PDF)) and loss concealment (predict lost codes) in decoding stage I. The conditional latent generator leverages the text-aided semantic latent prior and the concealed codes as condition signals, restoring the token sequence by multiple diffusion steps in decoding stage II.

A. Overview 

We recall that the objective function (1) of an image codec, is employed to seek a rate-distortion tradeoff, where the rate of the compressed vectors ˆy

R ≜ Rˆy = − log 2 p(ˆy), (3) is measured by an entropy model. We empirically find that it fails to yield high-quality image reconstructions at extreme-low bitrates, primarily due to excessive information loss of 

ˆy. Specifically, both fidelity and realism appear to degrade concurrently. This phenomenon manifests the inherent RDP trade-off in (2), which becomes particularly acute under severe bandwidth constraint. Thus, following GLC, ResiGLC performs transform coding in the generative latent space. The overview of the proposed framework is shown in Fig. 2. It begins with an image tokenizer E, which transforms pixels x to the token sequence 

l. The tokens reside in the latent space which exhibits better scaling properties with respect to the spatial dimensionality. Then, latent codes y ∈ RN ×C are extracted from the token sequence via an analysis transform ga, where N, C denotes the spatial and the channel dimension. The sender is going to compress y into an extreme low-bitrate representation b to meet bandwidth requirements. Firstly, a scalar quantizer Q

quantizes them to the discrete form ˆy, rounding to the nearest integers element-wise. A slice partition module (omitted in the figure) divides ˆy into K code slices Y = {Y 1, · · · , YK }.Each code slice is separately entropy-encoded to a bitstream 

bk, k = 1 , · · · , K , with contextual dependency determined by a context map G. The contextual modeling is implemented by a masked modeling Transformer (MMT). Finally, the coded bitstreams are packetized and then transmitted over a packet lossy wireless channel. At the receiver, ResiGLC aims to reconstruct high-quality images from the received latent codes, which are corrupted versions of ˆy in the context of packet-lossy transmission. Assuming the Open Systems Interconnection model, packet loss stems not only from severe channel fading at the physical layer [33] but also the buffer overflow at higher layers. The image decoder actually contends with an erasure channel, where erasures occur arbitrarily or in bursts. To model this, the transfer function of packet lossy channel W (Y, κ ) is char-acterized by binary-valued loss traces, where the parameter set 

κ depicts the trace distribution. The receiver strives to reconstruct the image via a two-stage progressive decoding procedure. In stage I, it firstly entropy decodes the latent codes from the received packets. Then, the latent code concealment reuses the MMT to predict the lost or undecodable codes. In stage II, a conditional latent generator restores the token sequence conditioned on the MMT-compensated latent codes as well as a global text description c of the image extracted via an image captioning module fcaption . Finally, the de-tokenizer maps the restored token sequence ˇl0 from the generative latent space back to the pixel space, with ˇx = D(ˇl0).In the following subsections, we will detail the workflow of the dual-functional MMT, and the progressive resilient decoding pipeline. 

B. Masked Modeling Transformer for Feature Compression and Concealment 

Current high-efficient neural image codecs obtain remark-able coding gain by designing powerful context models to better model p( ˆ y). The most representative context mode is autoregressive modeling that decomposes the joint likelihood of latent codes into the product of a series of conditional likelihoods: 

p(Y1, · · · , YK ) = 

> K

Y

> k=1

p(Yk|Y 1, · · · , Yk−1), (4) based on the information-theoretic fact that the conditional entropy H(Yk|Y 1, · · · , Yk−1) is not larger than the marginal entropy H(Yk). However, Yk fails to be recovered by entropy 52025/12/2  7        

> Masked Modeling Transformer
> (Bi -directional)
> Entropy Head Context Map
> Masked Modeling Transformer
> (Bi -directional)
> Prediction Head
> Entropy Decoder
> Mask token
> Packet #3 ( )Lost Concealed latent codes
> Fig. 3. Latent code decoding and concealment via dual-functional masked modeling Transformer.

Algorithm 1 ResiGLC Sender 

Input: Input image x, partitioner, text encoder, image caption module fcaption , packet number for latent codes K ∈ N+, mask token mmask , and context map G ∈ { 0, 1}K×K

Output: Set of packets {P 1, · · · , PK+1 } 

> 1:

function CONTEXTUAL MODEL (Y, i, G, r) 

> 2:

yi, ctx ← ones (N, C ) · mmask  

> 3:

for j ∈ { 1, · · · , i − 1} do ▷ Collect context  

> 4:

nj ← partitioner.get locations(step=j)  

> 5:

yi, ctx [nj , :] ← Y j if G[i, j ] · r[j] = 1  

> 6:

Ci ← fMMT (yi, ctx ) 

> 7:

return context vector Ci 

> 8:

function RESI GLC E NCODER (x, K, mmask , G) 

> 9:

▷ Image tokenization to generative latent space  

> 10:

l ← E (x) 

> 11:

▷ Latent code extraction and quantization  

> 12:

ˆy ← Q (ga(l))  

> 13:

Y ← {Y 1, · · · , YK } ← partitioner.get slices (ˆy, K ) 

> 14:

for k ∈ { 1, · · · , K } do  

> 15:

▷ Extract contexts of slice k 

> 16:

Ck ← CONTEXTUAL MODEL (Y, k, G, ones (K))  

> 17:

▷ Gaussian parameters estimation  

> 18:

μk, σk ← hentropy (Ck[nk, :])  

> 19:

▷ Slice-based entropy encoding & packetization  

> 20:

Pk ← entropy encoder (Yk, μk, σk) 

> 21:

▷ Encoding text in the last packet  

> 22:

PK+1 ← text encoder (c = fcaption (x))  

> 23:

return Set of packets {P 1, · · · , PK+1 }

decoding at the receiver if any of the contextual codes Yctx =

{Y 1, · · · , Yk−1} is not received. Existing error resilient codecs have attempted to limit the utilization of context to trade off coding efficiency for resilience. Motivated by these prior works, a dual-functional masked modeling Transformer is employed to perform 1) entropy modeling for efficient coding at the transmitter end, and 2) loss concealment for resilient decoding at the receiver end. Specifically, the latent codes ˆy are variationally modeled as multi-variate Gaussian variables, whose probabilistic density functions (PDF) are established in a factorized manner by 

p(ˆy) = 

> N

Y

> i=1

p(ˆ yi|ˆyi, ctx ) =  N (μi, σ 2 

> i

) (ˆ yi|ˆyi, ctx ) , (5) which are conditioned on the corresponding contextual latent codes ˆyi, ctx . The detailed workflow of ResiGLC sender is illustrated in Algorithm 1. As described previously, the en-tropy modeling is implemented slice-wisely for acceleration, computing μk = {μi}i∈nk and σk = {σi}i∈nk for the k-th slice. nk encapsulates the indices of latent codes within the 

k-th slice, which is determined by the slice partitioner. At the receiver, ResiGLC firstly tries to entropy decode ˆy

using the exact contextual relationship at the sender. Secondly, for the lost latent codes, the MMT is also employed to predict the original latent codes from the received ones. Assuming 

M ∈ { 0, 1}N ×C is a binary-valued matrix indicating the state of the latent code in every spatial location whether correctly decoded or not, the lost latent codes are replaced by a learnable mask embedding mmask ∈ RC . The MMT accepts ˆyM =

ˆy·(1−M)+ mmask ·M for code prediction. Thus, the resulting concealed latent codes can be formulated as 

ˇy = hPLC (fMMT (ˆyM )) · M + ˆyM · (1 − M), (6) which are later employed in stage II to enrich the content consistency. The workflow of stage I resilient decoding is summarized in Fig. 3. The Transformer layers are reused for both tasks, after which an entropy head hentropy predicts the distribution parameters θk = [ μk, σk], k = 1 , · · · , K , and a prediction head hPLC predicts the latent codes to fill the masked positions. 

C. Spatial-aware Conditional Latent Generation 

Despite maintaining good spatial consistency within the latent codes y, the extremely compressed representation still leads to significant information loss. Therefore, instead of directly decoding the latent codes, ResiGLC tries to incorpo-rate the prior knowledge of the token sequence in generative latent space, with the supervision of latent codes. As shown in the right of Fig. 2, apart from the concealed latent codes 

ˇy, we also leverage the global text description c of the image extracted at the encoder as an extra condition signal. Thus, the conditional latent generation could effectively take advantage of the diffusion prior as well as the spatial details. Specifically, we employ a latent diffusion model [34] to characterize the latent generation. The generation flow vt is a time-dependent function that transits from the Gaussian distribution to the target latent distribution. In the forward process, the noisy latent 

lt = αtl0 + βtϵ, (7) where l0 = l = E(x), ϵ ∼ N (0, I), and (αt, β t) is a predefined noise scheduler with α2 

> t

+ β2 

> t

= 1 , α 0 = 1 , β 0 = 0 .The conditional generation starts from a standard Gaussian vector lT . The latent generator parameterized by θ predicts the velocity as vθt (lt, c, ˇy), which is conditioned on the image caption and concealed latent codes. The goal is to regress the target velocity 

dlt

dt = C(αtϵ − βtl0) ≜ Cut, (8) where C is a constant. 6

Algorithm 2 ResiGLC Receiver 

Input: Packet set P, number of packets K for latent codes, mask token mmask , context map G, packet reception indica-tor r ∈ { 0, 1}K+1 , number of diffusion steps T , and text guidance strength w.

Output: Reconstruction image ˇx 

> 1:

function RESI GLC D ECODER (K, G, r) 

> 2:

ˆyM ← ones (N, C ) · mmask ▷ Collect latent codes  

> 3:

M ← ones (N, C ) 

> 4:

if rK+1 = 1 then  

> 5:

c ← text decoder (PK+1 ) ▷ Collect the text  

> 6:

for i ∈ { 1, · · · , K } do ▷ De-packetization  

> 7:

if ri = 1 then  

> 8:

▷ Try to decode latent code slice Yi 

> 9:

try:  

> 10:

yi, ctx ← CONTEXTUAL MODEL (Y, i, G, r) 

> 11:

if any contextual code lost then  

> 12:

ri ← 0 

> 13:

continue  

> 14:

▷ All contexts received, decode slice i 

> 15:

μi, σi ← hentropy (fMMT (yi, ctx )) [ ni, :]  

> 16:

M[ni, :] ← 0 ▷ Update mask  

> 17:

ˆyM [ni, :] ← entropy decoder (Pi, μi, σi) 

> 18:

▷ Stage I: Latent code loss concealment  

> 19:

ˇy ← hPLC (fMMT (ˆyM )) · M + ˆyM · (1 − M) 

> 20:

▷ Stage II: Conditional latent generation  

> 21:

Calculate the score estimate via (9), and lt−1 via (11) in T diffusion steps.  

> 22:

ˇl0 ← l0|t=1  

> 23:

▷ Reconstruct image from the concealed token se-quence  

> 24:

ˇx ← D (ˇl0) 

> 25:

return reconstruction image ˇx

During inference, we apply classifier-free guidance (CFG) [35] on the text condition. The resulting diffusion score is modified as the combination of the image-text conditioned score estimates and the image-only conditioned ones, as 

¯vθt (lt, c, ˇy) = ( w + 1) vθt (lt, c, ˇy) − wvθt (lt, ∅, ˇy), (9) where w is a positive parameter that controls the strength of the global textual semantic guidance. In case of missing of the image caption, the receiver turns to condition solely on the concealed image latent codes, omitting classifier-free guidance. In the backward sampling process, the predicted latent in each step is formulated by 

l0|t = αtlt − βt ¯vθt . (10) The latents for the previous timestep t − 1 are derived via the DDIM update rule [36]: 

lt−1 = αt−1l0|t + βt−1ˆϵt

= αt−1l0|t + βt−1

 βtlt + αt ¯vθt

 . (11) The resulting latents for pixel reconstruction come from the prediction in the final step ˇl0 ≜ l0|t=1 . The detailed workflow 2025/12/2               

> progressive
> decoding
> (Ours)
> Received
> Latent Code Map
> w/o stage I
> Original Image
> PSNR: 21.32dB
> LPIPS: 0.1574
> DISTS: 0.1016
> PSNR: 24.48dB
> LPIPS: 0.1300
> DISTS: 0.0910
> w/o stage II
> PSNR: 27.82dB
> LPIPS: 0.3260
> DISTS: 0.2710
> Lossy
> Transmission
> Fig. 4. Visual comparison of different decoding schemes. Left : Generate the image latent ˇldirectly from ˆyMvia a masked diffusion decoder. Center :ResiGLC’s two-stage progressive decoding scheme. Right : An image decoder reconstructs image from the restored latent codes ˇyM. The average loss ratio of latent codes is 25% , and a binary latent code map is presented on the right top with black color indicating missing. The enlarged areas are marked by pink boxes, with spatial alignment in pixel space and latent code space. Please zoom in for better viewing.

of ResiGLC receiver is illustrated in Algorithm 2. In practice, image caption c is encoded by text semantic encoder and then incorporated into the generation via the cross attention mechanism. Latent codes are firstly rescaled to the same spatial dimension and then fused with the noisy token sequence lt by channel-wise concatenation. Finally, they are mapped to condition vectors via a convolutional layer. Figure 4 presents a visualization example directly com-paring the reconstructions of different resilient decoding ap-proaches. We train a Masked Diffusion Decoder , similar to [37], which omits the latent code concealment. We also provide another baseline that decodes image directly from con-cealed latent codes ˇy (not in the realm of generative decoding). Particularly, another pixel decoder with Swin Transformer ar-chitecture [38] is employed, replacing the conditional diffusion model as well as the de-tokenizer. The reconstructions from the masked diffusion decoder (left) or decoding the latent codes (right) both suffer from severe visual artifacts and blurriness, especially in the regions with clustered loss (black area in latent code map). 

D. Training Strategy 

The training strategy of ResiGLC follows a three-phase training scheme, which progressively optimizes the condi-tional latent generator, the compression module, and the dual-functional MMT. 

1) Training text-conditioned latent generator: In the first phase, we train the latent diffusion model assuming reliable transmission, i.e., the uncompressed latent codes y are avail-able at the receiver. The tokenizer E is adapted from [34] with a continuous generative latent space. The neural backbone of the conditional latent generator is realized as a time-conditional UNet [39]. lt is efficiently obtained from E via (7) in the forward process, while the reconstruction image is decoded from the sample from p(l) via the de-tokenizer D.The training objective is to minimize the following loss: 

LG (t, c, y) = ∥ut(lt|l0) − vθt (lt, c, y = ∅)∥2, (12) 72025/12/2 

> Prediction Head

Tokenizer  Entropy Head 

> De -
> Tokenizer
> Spatial -aware
> conditional latent generator
> Spatial -aware
> conditional latent generator

De -

> Tokenizer

Tokenizer 

> LDM
> Diffusion

Process          

> Text caption / encoder
> De -
> Tokenizer
> Tokenizer
> LDM
> Fusion
> Spatial -aware
> conditional latent generator
> Trainable
> Frozen
> Spatial -aware
> conditional latent generator
> Phase I: Training text conditioned latent diffusion model Phase II: Training text -image conditioned latent diffusion model
> with Rate -Distortion -Perception optimization
> Phase III: Rate -Distortion -Perception -Resilience optimization
> MMT
> MMT
> Entropy Head
> Fig. 5. The progressive training procedure of ResiGLC consists of three phases. Phase I : Train the text-conditioned latent diffusion model. Phase II : Fine-tune the spatial-aware conditional latent generator conditioned on both the text prompt and the latent codes, and train the feature compressor gaand the MMT.
> Phase III : Incorporate the MMT’s prediction head, and jointly optimize the feature compressor, the MMT and the latent generator for rate-distortion-perception-resilience trade-off.

averaged over t and data distribution px. 10% random text dropping is implemented to enhance the robustness against the loss of textual condition. In this phase, the diffusion model is not conditioned on the latent codes y, which is set to the null condition ∅.

2) Rate-Distortion-Perception optimization: Assuming re-liable transmission, the second training phase only optimizes the token sequence compression efficiency and effectiveness. The receiver has full access to the quantized latent codes 

ˇy = ˆy = Q(y) without the need of concealment. We jointly optimize the compression module and the MMT for both compression efficiency performance. Particularly, a random binary mask M is applied on ˆy to simulate arbitrary context 

G. The rate loss R is calculated on the masked latent codes as 

R = − X

> i, Mi=1

log 2 p(ˆyi|ˆyM ). (13) For better perceptual fidelity, we also use LPIPS [23] loss from the pixel reconstruction, which measures the reconstruc-tion fidelity at the feature level by 

LP (x, ˇx) = X

> l

wl∥ψl(x) − ψl(ˇx)∥22. (14) Here, ˇx is reconstructed from the predicted latent l0|t in (10) for each sampled timestep t. ψl extracts features up to the l-th layer of a pre-trained VGG feature extractor and wl is the weight of the corresponding loss. The goal of the second training phase is to achieve better compression performance, where the loss function is formu-lated as the rate-distortion-perception trade-off by 

L(2) = Ex∼px,t ∈(1 ,··· ,T ),M [λLG (t, c, ˆy) + λP LP + R] ,

(15) where λ, λ P are hyperparameters that control the rate-distortion-perception trade-off. 

3) Rate-Distortion-Perception-Resilience optimization: In the third training phase, we randomly mask out a part of latent codes to simulate the lossy transmission. The MMT is further fine-tuned to conceal the lossy latent codes through the prediction head, while maintaining its compression perfor-mance using the original quantized latent codes. The diffusion loss is calculated on both the quantized latent codes ˆy and the concealed latent codes ˇy. The overall loss function is summarized as 

L(3) = Ex∼px,t ∈(1 ,··· ,T ),M



λ



LG(t, c, ˆy) + α

1 + α LG(t, c, ˇy)



+ λP LP + R



,

(16) where the hyperparameter α > 0 controls the efficiency and resilience trade-off. The training pipeline is summarized in Fig. 5. In practice, we vary λ to obtain ResiGLC models at different coding rates, and set α = 0 .5 to balance the resilience and efficiency. 

E. Packetization and Contextual Modeling Strategy 

The packetization scheme of ResiGLC plays a critical role in balancing coding efficiency and resilience against packet loss. In addition to the text description which is transmitted in a dedicated packet, the encoded bitstream of N latent codes 8Entropy      

> Encoding
> Bit Sequence Packets
> Packet -
> loss
> Network
> Optional
> Redundancy
> Fig. 6. Slice-based packetization scheme tailored for autoregressive context. Text bitstream bK+1 is optionally appended in other non-contextualized packets ( P1here) as redundancy for prioritized protection of global semantics.

with C dimensions is divided into K packets {P 1, · · · , PK },resulting in a total of K + 1 packets to be transmitted. Next, we discuss the strategy for partitioning the latent codes into packets. To enhance compression performance, we aim to minimize the conditional entropy H(Yk|Y ctx ). To achieve this, we establish our slice partitioner based on the quantized low-discrepancy sequences (QLDS) schedule [40], which generates pseudo-random integer sequences that mini-mize the discrepancy among all subsequences. Upon obtaining 

K groups of latent codes, we apply the context map to define their dependencies. We evaluate three different context maps, including autoregressive context, dual-autoregressive context, and independent context.  

> •

The autoregressive context defines a causal relationship among packets, i.e., the k-th packet can use all previous 

k − 1 packets as contexts (as plotted in Fig. 3, its context map G is a lower triangular matrix).  

> •

The dual-autoregressive context divides the slices into two groups and defines autoregressive context relation-ship for them separately.  

> •

The independent context indicates no contextual depen-dency, where G = IK is an identity matrix. The exploitation of intra-slice dependencies gradually de-creases from the autoregressive to the independent context, leading to the improvement of resilience against packet loss but at the cost of reduced coding efficiency. We observe that the choice of context maps has a distinct impact at a higher rate. Conversely, when emphasizing more on the rate term in model optimization, the impact on the coding efficiency gradually becomes marginal. Referring to the 5G NR standard [41], and assuming a coding rate of 0.05 ∼ 0.15 bpp, the image data are segmented into multiple code blocks. We map each packet to one code block for error correction coding at the physical layer. For simplicity, the packet number of ResiGLC is set to K = 4 at 

0.05 − 0.1 bpp and K = 6 for > 0.1 bpp. As shown in Fig. 6, FEC redundancy for text can be appended in other packets, to ensure prioritized protection of text semantics. Particularly, the packets that do not contextually depend on any packet are allowed to carry redundancy. In extreme cases where none of the packets are received, the decoder has no choice but to request retransmission since having no access to any available information of the image. The bandwidth overhead (estimated to be as less as 0.002 bpp equivalently) for the text redundancy,      

> Fig. 7. State transfer diagram of three-state Markov channel model. TABLE I PARAMETER SET κOF 3-STATE MARKOV CHANNEL MODELS

Channel model qC q1 q2 Q

EP1 (WLAN) 0.4072 0.9363 0.5652 0.3631 EP2 (GSM) 0.2742 0.9400 0.5821 0.6977 EP3 (GSM) 0.6305 0.8508 0.2000 0.2982 is negligible compared to that for latent codes. For simplicity, we assume that packet loss can be accurately detected at the receiver, via the packet headers or code-block-level cyclic redundancy checking. In other words, the reception state of latent codes is known to the receiver. IV. E XPERIMENTS 

A. Experimental Setup 1) Datasets and implementation details : ResiGLC is trained on OpenImages [42] training set. All images are resized to 

256 × 256 resolution, and randomly flipped horizontally for training. ResiGLC model is trained with the Adam optimizer with a batch size of 8 and learning rate of 10 −4. Evaluations are conducted on 512 × 512 images of CLIC2020 dataset [43] and 512 × 768 images of Kodak dataset [44]. The channel dimension of latent codes C is 320 for coding rate greater than 0.1 bpp and 160 otherwise. 

2) Packet-loss channel setup : We conduct our simulations on memoryless packet lossy channels with a given loss ratio and channels with memory. The packet loss trace of memory channel is simulated by a three-state Markov model [45]. The state transfer characteristics are described in Fig. 7, comprising the two loss-free states SC1 and SC2 with packet correctly received, and one state SL denoting packet loss. The Markov model is widely used and demonstrated effective in repro-ducing the characteristics of real network traces, especially for burst-like conditions with consecutive packet loss. The parameter qC depicts the probability of consecutive packet loss. Allowing independent self-loop probabilities q1 and q2

for two loss-free states, the model enables two types of error-free periods. Packet-level error patterns (EP) are generated to simulate wireless local area network (WLAN) channel (EP1) and wireless cellular networks (EP2 and EP3 simulate GSM channels) [46], and the corresponding parameters are shown in Table I. 

3) Comparison schemes : We compare our ResiGLC with several representative traditional and neural image codecs, including BPG [2], HiFiC [7], MS-ILLM [8], PerCo [10] and DiffEIC [9]. To evaluate the resilience, these codecs, combined 9    

> Fig. 8. Resilience performance over three-state Markov channels. (a–d) Fidelity and realism comparison on resized 512 ×512 images from CLIC2020 dataset over the WLAN channel (EP1). (e–f) LPIPS and DISTS metrics evaluated on Kodak dataset at original resolution under EP1. (g–h) DISTS performance on the CLIC2020 dataset over GSM channels EP2 and EP3, respectively.

with FEC for protection, are denoted as “DiffEIC + x% FEC” for example. We also compare with the state-of-the-art resilient image codecs LRIC [21] and ResiComp [22]. 

B. Metrics 

We employ established metrics to assess the rate-distortion-perception performance of ResiGLC. Concretely, the total bandwidth is measured in equivalent bpp, which accounts for the coding bits of latent codes and text description. For non-resilient codecs, FEC bitrate cost is also included. We exclude other bandwidth cost, including error-correction codes in physical layer and other protocol overheads, as they remain consistent for all evaluated methods. Objective fidelity is assessed by peak signal-to-noise ratio (PSNR), which equals −10 log 10 MSE (x, ˆx). We evaluate perceptual quality using FID [47], KID [48], DISTS [49] and LPIPS [23]. Among them, FID and KID are used to evalu-ate perceptual realism by matching the feature distributions between the original and reconstructed image sets. They are calculated on 256 × 256 overlapping patches, as described in HiFiC [7]. The latter two metrics are reference-based metrics measuring the perceptual fidelity by calculating the distance of deep features of two images. In the following figures, the upward arrow “ ↑” indicates that higher values of the metric are favorable, and vice versa. 

C. Resilience Performance 

We conduct packet-level simulations to evaluate the rate-distortion-perception performances over three-state Markov channels in Fig. 8. Traditional codecs reliant on FEC redun-dancy are highly susceptible to bursty loss. We add appropriate FEC based on the average loss ratio of the packet loss trace. In the event of decoding failure (i.e., when burst loss exceeds the FEC capability), a random noise image is substituted for performance evaluation. In contrast, ResiGLC avoids an abrupt quality degradation provided that any packet is decoded. The results, averaged over extensive simulations, demonstrate that ResiGLC consistently outperforms competing methods in perceptual quality, while maintaining comparable PSNR. For ResiGLC, points on each curve are obtained using different context maps G based on the same model. This illustrates that by selecting different context modes, ResiGLC effectively navigates trade-offs between error resilience and compression efficiency. The trend is particularly pronounced in the lower bitrate regime, characterized by a steeper slope. Specifically, Figs. 8(a)-(f) display the performance over WLAN channels, while Figs. 8(g) and (h) further present the resilience per-formance under two error patterns simulating GSM channels. The misalignment of FEC ratios with exact packet loss traces is emphasized under longer burst errors. We also provide the performance of perceptual image codec with high FEC redundancy (20% and 40% FEC), as shown in Figs. 8(e) and (f). Despite increased decoding success probability, it sacri-fices the effective image coding rate, therefore compromising bandwidth efficiency. By contrasting DISTS in Fig. 8(b) with FID/KID metrics in Figs. 8(c) and (d), we observe that enhancing packet-loss re-silience of latent codes contributes more notably to perceptual fidelity than to realism. This suggests that ResiGLC secures a baseline of image naturalness from text-conditioned generative prior, and then image conditions serve primarily to refine structural alignment. Despite the marginal gain in realism, it 10 0 20 40 60 80 Loss ratio (%) 0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 DISTS         

> DiffEIC + FEC ResiComp ResiGLC (Ours)
> 020 40 60 80 Loss ratio (%) 10 3
> 10 2
> 10 1
> KID
> Fig. 9. Loss resilience in terms of perceptual fidelity and realism under different loss ratios. The rate for all schemes is constrained below 0.06 bpp.

0 20 40 60 80 100 Loss ratio (%) N/A 70 75 80 85 90 95 100 Image-image CLIP score [×100] 

> DiffEIC + 40% FEC DiffEIC + 70% FEC LRIC ResiComp ResiGLC (Ours)

0 20 40 60 80 100 Loss ratio (%) N/A 20 22 24 26 28 30 32 Image-text CLIP score [×100]      

> Fig. 10. Semantic consistency evaluation in terms of CLIP score vs. the loss ratio of latent codes. “N/A” indicates either the image cannot be decoded correctly or the value is below the minimum. The total coding rate budget is 0.065 bpp for 512 ×512 images, including possible FEC redundancy.

consistently outperforms existing perceptual generative image codecs, validating its capability for resilient generative latent decoding from incomplete conditions. Results over memoryless packet lossy channels are pre-sented in Fig. 9, where we evaluate perceptual fidelity (DISTS) and realism (KID) across various loss ratios, with the total rate constrained below 0.06 bpp. ResiComp exhibits inferior performance in both aspects, as it is optimized toward lower objective distortion only. While perceptual image codec Dif-fEIC offers sufficient perceptual quality in reliable transmis-sion cases, its robustness relies on the FEC redundancy. In contrast, ResiGLC demonstrates inherent resilience to packet loss, attributed to the preliminary concealment of conditioning signals prior to token generation. 

D. Semantic Consistency 

CLIP score measures global alignment via cosine similarity between the CLIP embeddings [50]. We first assess the CLIP score between the original image and the reconstructed one. The results in Fig. 10 highlight the outstanding consistency across all loss ratios. With the increase of loss ratio, the traditional codecs reach their operational limits given the bandwidth budget, as sufficient FEC redundancy is required for successful decoding. While resilient image codecs like ResiComp and LRIC, present slower performance drop com-pared to “ codec + FEC” methods, the semantic consistency   

> TABLE II IMAGE -TEXT CLIP SCORE VERSUS THE LOSS RATIO OF LATENT CODES

Loss ratio (%) 0 25 50 75 95 CLIP score ↑ 29.4 29.6 29.9 30.4 31.2 deteriorates significantly as latent code loss intensifies. Con-versely, ResiGLC still maintains high semantic consistency in the high loss regime, which is attributed to the two-stage resilient coding utilizing both the latent code prior and the text-conditioned diffusion prior. We also evaluate the image-text CLIP score to measure the global textual semantic preservation under packet lossy channels, i.e., the similarity between the global feature vector of the reconstructed images and that of the image caption. Table II shows the CLIP score comparison under different loss ratios of latent codes. Counterintuitively, despite the same text-conditioning strength and diffusion steps T = 10 , the alignment with textual semantics is better even with the in-crease of loss ratio. This phenomenon indicates the conditional latent generator intrinsically shifts its dependency: as more latent codes are lost and concealed by MMT, the generator learns to rely more on the text conditions. Please refer to Subsection IV-G for visualization. 

E. Impact of Text Conditioning Strength 1.0 2.5 5.0 7.5 10.0 CFG Scale 0.14 0.15 0.16 0.17 DISTS  

> 50% loss 1.0 1.5 2.0 2.5 3.0 KID [×10  3]
> 30% loss
> DISTS KID
> Fig. 11. Fidelity and realism performances across different text conditioning scales when dropping 30% and 50% image latent codes at the receiver end.

As the global text conditioning is adjusted subject to availability, we additionally investigate the impact of the conditioning strength of the text condition within the CFG inference framework. Results in Fig. 11 show that KID de-creases with stronger text-conditioning strength. This indicates better naturalness when leveraging more global semantics as well as the diffusion prior. Conversely, the fidelity is better preserved with reduced text guidance. This phenomenon is more pronounced at higher loss ratios, where a larger scale is preferred to improve the realism. The primary reason is that the MMT concealment in stage I becomes more challenging and the resulting spatial image conditioning in stage II is not 11 

accurate, which fails to contribute to and may even degrade the realism of the reconstruction. In practice, we adopt a CFG scale of w ∈ [2 .5, 7.5] .                    

> TABLE III COMPARISON OF DIFFERENT IMAGE CAPTIONING METHODS UNDER 10%
> PACKET LOSS
> Text Type Image-text CLIP Score ↑FID ↓KID ↓Time Cost (ms)
> BLIP-2 29.5 19.3 0.00134 295 OFA-Tiny 26.4 20.9 0.00179 96 Empty string 28.5 20.1 0.0022 0

We evaluate three different approaches to evaluate the ro-bustness regarding the text caption, including (1) BLIP-2 [51], a visual-language model which consists of a CLIP-like encoder and a querying Transformer; (2) OFA-Tiny, a lightweight multi-modal model OFA [52] with 33M parameters; (3) Empty string, i.e., without encoding and transmitting image caption. The decoder is conditioned solely on the image tokens. Table III compares the averaged reconstruction quality un-der 10% packet loss, showing that both semantic consistency and perceptual realism are improved with the quality of image description. The text conditioning is randomly dropped during training, which enhances the robustness of ResiGLC against the loss of text description. The ResiGLC decoder can generate images solely conditioned on the received image tokens. The time cost of image captioning varies. Using OFA-Tiny model reduces the time cost from 295 ms to 96 ms for 512 × 512 

images, at the expense of image quality. Note that ResiGLC’s decoder takes a short description ( ∼ 10 words) as input, the time cost for image captioning is not significant. 

F. Reconstruction from Deconstruction 

The denoising paradigm of modern generative models has inspired numerous works in visual tokenizers [53]. Typical noising strategies take place in latent space including masking noise (apply a binary mask) and Gaussian noise, which can be collectively characterized as structured noise with analytical probabilistic distribution function. They share the conceptually similar objective, i.e., to reconstruct original signals from deconstructed ones. However, the “noise” from latent codes over lossy channels departs from the denoising mode of these generative models, which is the major obstacle that prevents them from generalizing to channel impairments. In synergy with MMT, ResiGLC reformulates the denoising latent diffusion models to adapt to the disturbance of latent codes. The conditional latent generator in decoding stage II removes diffusion-induced noise in generative latent space to recover clean latents, but also learns the generation from noisy condition signals in the latent code space. We examine the effectiveness of two-stage resilient de-coding under the same Markov channel setting, as shown in Table IV. Latent code concealment in stage I improves both fidelity and realism when employing generative latent features to reconstruct images. We also train a baseline model at similar coding rate that directly decodes images from ˇy via 

> TABLE IV ABLATION STUDY OF TWO -STAGE RESILIENT DECODING .

Model PSNR (dB) ↑ DISTS ↓ FID ↓

ResiGLC 19.74 0.146 19.76 

w/o stage I 17.89 0.177 33.65 w/o stage II 24.39 0.324 106.88 another pixel decoder (“w/o stage II” in the table). Despite better pixel-level fidelity, the perceptual quality and realism are undermined in this bitrate regime. A visualization example can be found in Fig. 4. 

G. Visualization 

Figure 12 provides an intuitive comparison of ResiGLC’s resilience under different packet loss patterns, including mem-oryless packet loss probabilities (50% and 20%) as well as a bursty WLAN channel (EP1). In addition to averaged metrics, we report the cumulative distribution functions (CDFs) of DISTS performance to visualize the variance in reconstruction quality. For traditional codecs, the FEC ratio is configured by the average loss ratio, and is redundant in WLAN channel. Despite this, the image reconstruction may fail as the packet loss fluctuates, attributed to the breakdown of entropy decoding. For PerCo, which employs vector quantization instead of entropy coding, the lost indices are substituted with zero values before decoding. Traditional codecs have to rely on stringent link adaptation and feedback to the sender for FEC configuration, which is hindered in extreme-bandwidth scenarios. On the contrary, ResiGLC obtains reconstructions with more stable objective and perceptual fidelity, even without prior knowledge of channel statistics at the sender side. This property underscores the flexibility that the visual communi-cation system can simplify the link adaptation and other error control mechanisms, enabling intrinsically robust semantic communications in bandwidth-limited scenarios. 

H. Rate-Distortion-Perception Compression Performance 

The rate-distortion-perception compression performance on CLIC2020 dataset is shown in Fig. 13. BPG, MS-ILLM, HIFI-C, and DiffEIC are tested using their officially released mod-els. BPG is tested using Quantizer Parameter QP = 48 , 50 ,and 51 , respectively. HIFI-C is tested using the hific-low 

profile. ResiGLC is evaluated on models with λ = 0 .4, 1.0,separately. We observe that ResiGLC achieves similar or better perceptual quality (fidelity and realism) below 0.1 bpp, compared to traditional and neural image codecs. While a gap still appears in PSNR performance compared to non-generative image codecs (e.g., MS-ILLM and HIFI-C), ResiGLC appar-ently excels among the existing diffusion-based image codecs, like DiffEIC [9] and PerCo [10]. ResiGLC divides the latent codes into several slices and can decode images using a subset of them. It intrinsically supports the feature of progressive coding, benefiting from the context modeling with arbitrary context map and the resilient decod-ing. Fig. 14 shows the performance of progressive coding and 12 ResiGLC bpp = 0.0538 

Recon. from text only 

 50% loss probability 

Original Image BPG + 50% FEC MS-ILLM + 20% FEC 

 20% loss probability  

> +12.6% bpp +44.1% bpp

 WLAN EP1 

PerCo + 40% FEC 

> +10.6% bpp

Test condition 

Decoding failure 

Decoding failure      

> Fig. 12. Visualization example of resilient image transmission over packet loss channels. The second and third columns correspond to memoryless packet loss probability of 50% and 20%, and the fourth column corresponds to WLAN channel (EP1). The cumulative distribution functions (CDFs) of DISTS performance are reported, where the curve closer to the upper right is better. Crucially, the distinct markers (e.g., ⋆, ◦,△) on the CDF curves correspond to the specific reconstructed images displayed in the top and bottom rows. For existing image codecs (top row), the FEC redundancy ratio is chosen based on channel characteristics. The coding rate including FEC is marked in red, anchored by ResiGLC. As the practical packet loss fluctuates, the image reconstruction may fail (indicated by “ ◦” on the CDF curves), attributing to the entropy decoding failure. Instead, ResiGLC (bottom row) can reconstruct images with varying numbers of packets, exhibiting robust communication even without knowledge of channel statistics. The image is generated solely conditioned on the caption “A large body of water with a mountain in the background ” when only text is received (bottom leftmost).
> Fig. 13. Rate-distortion-perception compression performance on CLIC2020 dataset compared with traditional and perceptual image codecs.

transmission over reliable channel. Specifically, we anchor our ResiGLC model at 0.112 bpp as the full coding rate model, where the latent codes are divided into K = 6 slices. The red curve illustrates the quality improvement with more latent codes received, in terms of less objective distortion and better perceptual quality. Over reliable channels, we emphasize the potential of ResiGLC to flexibly fit the channel bandwidth to determine which and how many latent code slices to send. 

I. Complexity Analysis 

We report the computational and space complexities com-pared to existing image codecs in Table V. We measured the encoding and decoding time on GPU, including the model inference time and the entropy encoding/decoding time, under the packet-loss scenarios. The parameter K, denoting the num-ber of slices that the compressed vectors are partitioned into, is also listed. For instance, DiffEIC uses 20 slices, comprising 10 

channel-wise and 2 spatial splits. As observed, non-diffusion-based image codecs generally maintain an advantage in la-tency, without the multi-step diffusion sampling. ResiGLC’s two-stage resilient decoding does not incur significant extra computational overhead among diffusion-based models. In terms of space complexity (measured in parameter count), the MMT module in ResiGLC is lightweight compared to diffusion backbone itself. We compare the performance of ResiGLC with fewer diffu-sion steps T in Fig. 15 to investigate the trade-off between the quality and decoding latency. The latent generation in stage 13 0.00 0.05 0.10 0.15 Rate (bpp) 15 18 21 24 27 30 PSNR (dB)                   

> 0.00 0.05 0.10 0.15 Rate (bpp) 0.10 0.15 0.20 0.25 0.30 DISTS
> 0.00 0.05 0.10 0.15 Rate (bpp) 23
> 24
> 25
> 26
> FID
> 0.00 0.05 0.10 0.15 Rate (bpp) 10 4
> 10 3
> 10 2
> 10 1
> KID
> (Progressive Coding) RDP Curves for CLIC2020_resize512
> MS-ILLM HifiC-low PerCo DiffEIC ResiGLC (w/o stage I) ResiGLC

Fig. 14. Rate-distortion-perception performances in progressive coding cases. ResiGLC is evaluated using the same model, where the rightmost point indicates the full coding rate, sending all the latent code slices. TABLE V COMPUTATIONAL COMPLEXITY AND AVERAGED ENCODING /DECODING LATENCY COMPARISON 

Method Diffusion model K Inference Time ∗

Param. ‡

Enc. Dec. GMM-Attn [4] × N 78 ms > 10 3ms 20 MResiComp [22] 10 131 ms 167 ms 128 MDiffEIC [9] 

✓

20 310 ms > 10 3ms 1379 MPerCo [10] N/A 46 ms 689 ms 955 M

ResiGLC 4 36 ms 615 ms 969 M 

> *

All experiments are conducted on the same platform with an Intel Xeon Gold 6226R CPU, an RTX 4090 GPU, with PyTorch 2.3.0 and CUDA 11.8. Inference time includes the model inference time and the entropy enc./dec. time. All diffusion models use T = 10 steps.  

> ‡

The image captioning and text encoder modules are excluded for the parameter count. 2     T2    2 22 2    2   

T Decoding time (ms) 4090 2080Ti 2 150 442 4 265 853 6 379 1315 8 492 1721 10 615 2160 

Fig. 15. Quality-latency trade-off curves under different numbers of diffusion steps T . K = 4 slices at ∼ 0.06 bpp for 512 × 512 images are encoded and transmitted over i.i.d. packet loss channel with 10% and 20% loss probability each. Decoding latencies are measured on one RTX 4090 and RTX 2080Ti GPU, respectively. 

II remains the critical bottleneck for practical deployment, especially for weaker GPUs. Other pipelines including entropy decoding and concealing in stage I take about 40 ms. Too few diffusion steps ( T = 2 ) prevent sufficient feature fusion with concealed latent codes. As T increases to 10 , the perceptual quality improves significantly, while the decoding latency increases by more than 4 times. In practice, a smaller T can be adopted to achieve a better quality-latency trade-off, to meet diverse latency requirements and hardware constraints. V. C ONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 

This paper proposes ResiGLC , a loss-resilient generative semantic communication framework. Through progressive de-coding, it achieves substantial resilience in perceptual fidelity and realism at extreme-low bandwidth, while maintaining comparable objective fidelity. ResiGLC holds promise for providing crucial support for robust visual communications in bandwidth-limited and feedback-constrained scenarios. Future work may focus on multi-modal collaborative compression and concealment, and model compression and quantization for faster inference in practical deployment. REFERENCES [1] D. Wu, Y. T. Hou, and Y.-Q. Zhang, “Transporting real-time video over the internet: Challenges and approaches,” Proceedings of the IEEE ,vol. 88, no. 12, pp. 1855–1877, 2000. [2] F. Bellard, “BPG image format.” URL: https://bellard.org/bpg/ .[3] J. Ball´ e, D. Minnen, S. Singh, S. J. Hwang, and N. Johnston, “Variational image compression with a scale hyperprior,” in International Conference on Learning Representations , 2018. [4] Z. Cheng, H. Sun, M. Takeuchi, and J. Katto, “Learned image com-pression with discretized gaussian mixture likelihoods and attention modules,” in Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition , 2020, pp. 7939–7948. [5] I. Goodfellow, J. Pouget-Abadie, M. Mirza, B. Xu, D. Warde-Farley, S. Ozair, A. Courville, and Y. Bengio, “Generative adversarial networks,” 

Communications of the ACM , vol. 63, no. 11, pp. 139–144, 2020. [6] J. Ho, A. Jain, and P. Abbeel, “Denoising diffusion probabilistic models,” in Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , H. Larochelle, M. Ranzato, R. Hadsell, M. Balcan, and H. Lin, Eds., vol. 33. Curran Associates, Inc., 2020, pp. 6840–6851. [7] F. Mentzer, G. D. Toderici, M. Tschannen, and E. Agustsson, “High-fidelity generative image compression,” Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , vol. 33, pp. 11 913–11 924, 2020. [8] M. J. Muckley, A. El-Nouby, K. Ullrich, H. J´ egou, and J. Verbeek, “Improving statistical fidelity for neural image compression with im-plicit local likelihood models,” in International Conference on Machine Learning . PMLR, 2023, pp. 25 426–25 443. [9] Z. Li, Y. Zhou, H. Wei, C. Ge, and J. Jiang, “Toward extreme image compression with latent feature guidance and diffusion prior,” IEEE Transactions on Circuits and Systems for Video Technology , vol. 35, no. 1, pp. 888–899, 2025. [10] M. Careil, M. J. Muckley, J. Verbeek, and S. Lathuili` ere, “Towards image compression with perfect realism at ultra-low bitrates,” in The Twelfth International Conference on Learning Representations , 2024. [11] Z. Jia, J. Li, B. Li, H. Li, and Y. Lu, “Generative latent coding for ultra-low bitrate image compression,” in Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition , 2024, pp. 26 088–26 098. [12] A. Nafaa, T. Taleb, and L. Murphy, “Forward error correction strategies for media streaming over wireless networks,” IEEE Communications Magazine , vol. 46, no. 1, pp. 72–79, 2008. 14 

[13] J.-M. Valin, J. B¨ uthe, and A. Mustafa, “Low-bitrate redundancy coding of speech using a rate-distortion-optimized variational autoencoder,” in ICASSP 2023 - 2023 IEEE International Conference on Acoustics, Speech and Signal Processing (ICASSP) , 2023, pp. 1–5. [14] K. Chen, H. Wang, S. Fang, X. Li, M. Ye, and H. J. Chao, “Rl-afec: adaptive forward error correction for real-time video communication based on reinforcement learning,” in Proceedings of the 13th ACM Multimedia Systems Conference , ser. MMSys ’22. New York, USA: Association for Computing Machinery, 2022, p. 96–108. [15] E. Bourtsoulatze, D. B. Kurka, and D. G¨ und¨ uz, “Deep joint source-channel coding for wireless image transmission,” IEEE Transactions on Cognitive Communications and Networking , vol. 5, no. 3, pp. 567–579, 2019. [16] H. Esfahanizadeh, N. Fayaz, J. Du, and H. Viswanathan, “Block erasure-aware semantic multimedia compression via jscc autoencoder,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2601.20707 , 2026. [17] J. He, X. Luo, J. Kang, H. Du, Z. Xiong, C. Chen, D. Niyato, and X. Shen, “Toward mixture-of-experts enabled trustworthy semantic communication for 6g networks,” IEEE Network , vol. 39, no. 5, pp. 221–230, 2024. [18] J. Huang, K. Yuan, C. Huang, and K. Huang, “D 2-jscc: Digital deep joint source-channel coding for semantic communications,” IEEE Journal on Selected Areas in Communications , vol. 43, no. 4, pp. 1246– 1261, 2025. [19] H. Chang, H. Zhang, L. Jiang, C. Liu, and W. T. Freeman, “MaskGIT: Masked generative image transformer,” in Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition , 2022, pp. 11 315–11 325. [20] Y. Gao, Z. Hu, L. Zhou, and W. Zhuang, “Cross-sensory transmission for 6g-enabled immersive communication,” IEEE Transactions on Mobile Computing , vol. 25, no. 6, pp. 8511–8523, 2026. [21] H. Sha, M. Dong, Q. Luo, M. Lu, H. Chen, and Z. Ma, “Towards loss-resilient image coding for unstable satellite networks,” in Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence , vol. 39, no. 12, 2025, pp. 12 506–12 514. [22] S. Wang, J. Dai, X. Qin, K. Yang, K. Niu, and P. Zhang, “Resicomp: Loss-resilient image compression via dual-functional masked visual token modeling,” IEEE Transactions on Circuits and Systems for Video Technology , vol. 35, no. 7, pp. 7181–7195, 2025. [23] R. Zhang, P. Isola, A. A. Efros, E. Shechtman, and O. Wang, “The unreasonable effectiveness of deep features as a perceptual metric,” in 

Proceedings of the IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition , 2018, pp. 586–595. [24] L. Theis, T. Salimans, M. D. Hoffman, and F. Mentzer, “Lossy compres-sion with gaussian diffusion,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2206.08889 , 2022. [25] E. Lei, Y. B. Uslu, H. Hassani, and S. S. Bidokhti, “Text+ sketch: Image compression at ultra low rates,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2307.01944 , 2023. [26] Y. Blau and T. Michaeli, “The perception-distortion tradeoff,” in Pro-ceedings of the IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition , 2018, pp. 6228–6237. [27] A. van den Oord, O. Vinyals, and K. Kavukcuoglu, “Neural discrete representation learning,” in Proceedings of the 31st International Confer-ence on Neural Information Processing Systems , 2017, pp. 6309–6318. [28] J.-M. Valin, K. Vos, and T. Terriberry, “Definition of the Opus audio codec,” IETF, September , 2012. [29] S. Yao, J. Dai, X. Qin, S. Wang, S. Wang, K. Niu, and P. Zhang, “Sound-spring: Loss-resilient audio transceiver with dual-functional masked lan-guage modeling,” IEEE Journal on Selected Areas in Communications ,vol. 43, no. 4, pp. 1308–1322, 2025. [30] X. Jiang, X. Peng, H. Xue, Y. Zhang, and Y. Lu, “Latent-domain predictive neural speech coding,” IEEE/ACM Transactions on Audio, Speech, and Language Processing , vol. 41, pp. 2111–2123, 2023. [31] Y. Cheng, Z. Zhang, H. Li, A. Arapin, Y. Zhang, Q. Zhang, Y. Liu, K. Du, X. Zhang, F. Y. Yan et al. , “GRACE:loss-resilient real-time video through neural codecs,” in 21st USENIX Symposium on Networked Systems Design and Implementation (NSDI 24) , 2024, pp. 509–531. [32] G. Zhang, P. Yang, Y. Cai, Q. Hu, and G. Yu, “From analog to digital: Multi-order digital joint coding-modulation for semantic communica-tion,” IEEE Transactions on Communications , vol. 73, no. 6, pp. 4257– 4271, 2025. [33] H. Bai and M. Atiquzzaman, “Error modeling schemes for fading channels in wireless communications: A survey,” IEEE Communications Surveys & Tutorials , vol. 5, no. 2, pp. 2–9, 2003. [34] R. Rombach, A. Blattmann, D. Lorenz, P. Esser, and B. Ommer, “High-resolution image synthesis with latent diffusion models,” in Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recogni-tion , 2022, pp. 10 684–10 695. [35] J. Ho and T. Salimans, “Classifier-free diffusion guidance,” in NeurIPS 2021 Workshop on Deep Generative Models and Downstream Applica-tions , 2021. [36] J. Song, C. Meng, and S. Ermon, “Denoising diffusion implicit models,” in International Conference on Learning Representations , 2021. [37] S. Sahoo, M. Arriola, Y. Schiff et al. , “Simple and effective masked diffusion language models,” Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , vol. 37, pp. 130 136–130 184, 2024. [38] Z. Liu, Y. Lin, Y. Cao, H. Hu, Y. Wei, Z. Zhang, S. Lin, and B. Guo, “Swin transformer: Hierarchical vision transformer using shifted windows,” in Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer Vision (ICCV) , 2021. [39] O. Ronneberger, P. Fischer, and T. Brox, “U-net: Convolutional net-works for biomedical image segmentation,” in International Conference on Medical Image Computing and Computer-Assisted Intervention .Springer, 2015, pp. 234–241. [40] F. Mentzer, E. Agustson, and M. Tschannen, “M2t: Masking trans-formers twice for faster decoding,” in Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer Vision , 2023, pp. 5340–5349. [41] 3GPP, “NR; Multiplexing and channel coding,” 3rd Generation Part-nership Project (3GPP), Valbonne, France, Technical Specification TS 38.212, September 2024, release 18, V18.3.0. [42] I. Krasin, T. Duerig, N. Alldrin, V. Ferrari, and et al., “Openimages: A public dataset for large-scale multi-label and multi-class image classification.” Dataset available from https://github.com/openimages ,2017. [43] G. Toderici, S. Wenzhe, and T. Radu, “Clic 2020: Challenge on learned image compression,” 2020. [Online]. Available: http: //www.compression.cc [44] “Kodak PhotoCD dataset,” URL: http://r0k.us/graphics/kodak/ , 1993. [45] M. Yajnik, S. Moon, J. Kurose, and D. Towsley, “Measurement and mod-elling of the temporal dependence in packet loss,” in IEEE INFOCOM ’99. Conference on Computer Communications. Proceedings. Eighteenth Annual Joint Conference of the IEEE Computer and Communications Societies. , vol. 1, 1999, pp. 345–352 vol.1. [46] B. Milner and A. James, “Packet loss modelling for distributed speech recognition,” in COST278 and ISCA Tutorial and Research Work-shop (ITRW) on Robustness Issues in Conversational Interaction (Ro-bust2004) , 2004. [47] M. Heusel, H. Ramsauer, T. Unterthiner et al. , “GANs trained by a two time-scale update rule converge to a local nash equilibrium,” Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , vol. 30, 2017. [48] M. Bi´ nkowski, D. J. Sutherland, M. Arbel, and A. Gretton, “Demysti-fying mmd gans,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1801.01401 , 2018. [49] K. Ding, K. Ma, S. Wang et al. , “Image quality assessment: Unifying structure and texture similarity,” IEEE Transactions on Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence , vol. 44, no. 5, pp. 2567–2581, 2020. [50] J. Hessel, A. Holtzman, M. Forbes, R. Le Bras, and Y. Choi, “Clipscore: A reference-free evaluation metric for image captioning,” in Proceedings of the 2021 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing , 2021, pp. 7514–7528. [51] J. Li, D. Li, S. Savarese, and S. Hoi, “Blip-2: Bootstrapping language-image pre-training with frozen image encoders and large language models,” in International Conference on Machine Learning . PMLR, 2023, pp. 19 730–19 742. [52] P. Wang, A. Yang, R. Men, J. Lin, S. Bai, Z. Li, J. Ma, C. Zhou, J. Zhou, and H. Yang, “Ofa: Unifying architectures, tasks, and modalities through a simple sequence-to-sequence learning framework,” in International Conference on Machine Learning . PMLR, 2022, pp. 23 318–23 340. [53] K. He, X. Chen, S. Xie et al. , “Masked autoencoders are scalable vision learners,” in Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR) , June 2022, pp. 16 000–16 009.