Title: Beyond Visual Fidelity: Benchmarking Super-Resolution Models for Large-Scale Remote Sensing Imagery via Downstream Task Integration

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2605.00310v1

Published Time: Mon, 04 May 2026 00:26:30 GMT

Number of Pages: 17

Markdown Content:
> JOURNAL OF L ATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. 14, NO. 8, AUGUST 2021 1

# Beyond Visual Fidelity: Benchmarking Super-Resolution Models for Large-Scale Remote Sensing Imagery via Downstream Task Integration 

Zhili Li, Kangyang Chai, Zhihao Wang, Xiaowei Jia, Yanhua Li, Gengchen Mai, Sergii Skakun, Dinesh Manocha, Yiqun Xie 

Abstract —Super-resolution (SR) techniques have made major advances in reconstructing high-resolution images from low-resolution inputs. The increased resolution provides visual enhancement and utility for monitoring tasks. In particular, SR has been increasingly developed for satellite-based Earth observation, with applications in urban planning, agriculture, ecology, and disaster response. However, existing SR studies and benchmarks typically use fidelity metrics such as PSNR or SSIM, whereas the true utility of super-resolved images lies in supporting downstream tasks such as land cover classification, biomass estimation, and change detection. To bridge this gap, we introduce GeoSR-Bench, a downstream task-integrated SR benchmark dataset to evaluate SR models beyond fidelity metrics. GeoSR-Bench comprises spatially co-located, temporally aligned, and quality-controlled image pairs from about 36,000 locations across diverse land covers, spanning resolutions from 500m to 0.6m. To the best of our knowledge, GeoSR-Bench is the first SR benchmark that directly connects improved image resolution from SR models with downstream Earth monitoring tasks, including land cover segmentation, infrastructure mapping, and biophysical variable estimation. Using GeoSR-Bench, we benchmark GAN, transformer, neural operator, and diffusion-based SR models on perceptual quality and downstream task performance. We conduct experiments with 270 settings, covering 2 cross-platform SR tasks, 9 SR models, 3 downstream task models, and 5 downstream tasks for each SR task. The results show that improvements in traditional SR metrics often do not correlate with gains in task performance, and the correlations can be negative, indicating that these metrics provide limited guidance for selecting superior models for downstream tasks. This reveals the need to integrate downstream tasks into SR model development and evaluation. 

Index Terms —Super Resolution, Downstream Tasks, Bench-mark Dataset, Downstream Task Performance, Remote Sensing 

I. I NTRODUCTION 

Resolution enhancement for remote sensing images brings promising potential to unlock the collective monitoring power offered by diverse platforms. First, high-resolution remote sensing images (e.g., meter-level or sub-meter resolutions) play a vital role in a wide array of Earth monitoring tasks, including urban planning, agriculture, ecology, disaster response, and so on, where fine-granularity visual signals are important to 

Corresponding author: Yiqun Xie. Zhili Li, Kangyang Chai, Zhihao Wang, Sergii Skakun, Dinesh Manocha, and Yiqun Xie are with University of Maryland. E-mail: {lizhili, kychai, zhwang1, skakun, dmanocha, xie}@umd.edu. Xiaowei Jia is with University of Pittsburgh. E-mail: xiaowei@pitt.edu. Yanhua Li is with Worcester Polytechnic Institute. E-mail: yli15@wpi.edu. Gengchen Mai is with University of Texas at Austin E-mail: gengchen.mai@austin.utexas.edu. 

capture details such as narrow roads [82], individual residential buildings [7], [40], vehicles, solar panels [11], and fragmented land use. However, acquiring such imagery at large scale and continuously over time is often challenging due to the very high cost. In addition, such platforms are often provided by commercial sectors, making the data highly expensive and less accessible. Second, many high-resolution platforms (e.g., PlanetScope) rely on more recent sensing technologies, such as small-satellite constellations with improved high-resolution optical sensors, which are only available in nearer time frame, significantly limiting data availability over time for tracking past changes and events [16]. In contrast, coarse (e.g., 200 to 1000m) and medium (e.g., 10 to 30m) resolution platforms have much longer availability spanning over multiple past decades. Lastly, in addition to high-resolution images, medium-resolution images are also important for a broad range of applications, such as crop mapping, yield prediction, deforestation monitoring, ice tracking, etc. However, these sensing platforms often have a small constellation with a few satellites, reducing their revisit time to each location and increasing the temporal gaps. For example, the revisit time is about 16 days for Landsat-8 and 5-10 days for Sentinel-2 [31]. On the other hand, coarse-resolution platforms have a much larger footprint per image and higher revisit frequency. For example, the MODIS platform can offer a daily global coverage. Thus, upgrading the resolution both from coarse to medium and from medium to high enables new opportunities to significantly improve the monitoring capabilities. Super-resolution (SR) techniques have emerged as power-ful tools to reconstruct high-resolution images from lower-resolution inputs. However, existing developments of SR methods for remote sensing data have mostly focused on the visual fidelity of the generated images [18] (e.g., structural similarity to high-resolution images) but lack emphasis on the downstream tasks, such as land cover classification, biomass estimation, and change detection [26]. In Earth observation, though, the visual fidelity and sharpness may not directly link to improvements in these related applications [19], and spurious details–if present–may even lead to incorrect maps and negatively impact decision making. Thus, this paper aims to bridge the gap by developing a new benchmark dataset integrating downstream tasks (e.g., land cover mapping, infras-tructure masking, environment monitoring) into the evaluation of SR methods, providing a foundation for task-integrated SR development and enabling assessment of whether the sharper                

> arXiv:2605.00310v1 [cs.CV] 1 May 2026 JOURNAL OF L ATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. 14, NO. 8, AUGUST 2021 2MODIS Landsat -8Sentinel -2NAIP
> 500 m 30 m 10 m 0.6 m
> Coarse Resolution Medium Resolution High Resolution
> Spatial
> Resolution SRTask 1SRTask 2
> Fig. 1. GeoSR benchmark focuses on two cross-platform SR tasks: MODIS (500m) to Landsat-8 (30m), and Sentinel-2 (10m) to NAIP (0.6m), covering platforms and resolutions that span the most widely used in downstream applications.

images can truly improve the solution quality on various downstream tasks. There have been broad efforts in developing benchmark datasets for SR tasks, including several efforts on the remote sensing imagery side. Benchmarks such as DIV2K [1], Flickr2K [35], and LSDIR [32] were developed for non-satellite images and support training using synthetic pairs, where low-resolution inputs are synthetically downsampled from high-resolution images. Recent efforts including [25] and [6], have also improved that using real pairs of low and high resolution images which can be captured by, for example, changing the focus of the camera. However, these datasets focus on regular images that often have a very different view and resolution than remote sensing images, such as horizontal vs. top-down views, and millimeter vs meter level resolutions. Expanding this, various efforts have developed benchmark datasets for remote sensing images, including SEN2VENμS [45], WorldStrat [12], and PROBA-V [42]. However, these datasets considered only traditional metrics related to perception-level visual appearance, such as Peak Signal-to-Noise Ratio (PSNR) and Structural Similarity Index (SSIM), which do not reveal if and how the SR results can benefit tasks in downstream applications. To bridge the gaps, we introduce GeoSR-Bench, a down-stream task-integrated SR benchmark dataset to more deeply evaluate the performance of SR models beyond fidelity metrics. Our contributions are summarized as follows:  

> •

We develop GeoSR-Bench , the first benchmark dataset for remote sensing image super-resolution that integrates downstream tasks for direct evaluations in the application context. The SR part of the dataset comprises spatially co-located, temporally aligned, and quality-controlled image pairs from approximately 20,000 locations over the global across diverse urban and non-urban land covers, which can be used to train and evaluate SR models using standard fidelity metrics. The dataset covers multiple remote sensing platforms with a broad range of commonly used resolutions, from coarse to medium, and from medium to high. Specifically, it includes two cross-platform SR tasks (Fig. 1): from MODIS to Landsat-8 (i.e., from 500m to 30m) and from Sentinel-2 to NAIP (i.e., from 10m to 0.6m), which collectively represent platforms that are most widely used in downstream applications.  

> •

GeoSR-Bench further includes 5 downstream tasks from different applications (e.g., land cover segmentation, in-frastructure mapping, biophysical variable estimation) for each cross-platform SR task, such that higher-resolution imagery provides a clear advantage over lower-resolution inputs, enabling meaningful evaluation of SR improvements. The downstream task part contains image pairs from lower-and higher-resolution platforms as well as target pixel-level labels from approximately 16,000 locations across two cross-platform SR tasks (i.e., MODIS to Landsat-8 and Sentinel-2 to NAIP). These allow finetuning of SR models and training task-focused models to evaluate the real utility of SR results in the application context.  

> •

We benchmark a suite of SR models, including GAN-, transformer-, neural operator-, and diffusion-based models, using metrics for both perceptual quality and downstream tasks. We conduct extensive experiments with 270 different settings, covering 2 cross-platform SR tasks, 9 SR models, 3 downstream task models, 5 downstream tasks for each SR task. The results reveal that improvements in traditional SR metrics often do not correlate with gains in task performance, and the correlations can be negative in many scenarios, indicating that these metrics provide only limited guidance when concluding superior models for downstream tasks. This reveals the necessity and importance of integrating downstream tasks into the continued development and evaluation of SR models.  

> •

We open-source the dataset, trained models, and evaluation protocols, to support the development of new SR models and evaluations with a variety of downstream tasks. The dataset, code, and trained models for this benchmark are publicly available at https://github.com/ai-spatial/GeoSR-Bench. 

Scope: This paper focuses on pixel-level tasks (e.g., se-mantic segmentation, pixel-level regression) for downstream applications because: (1) Pixel-level tasks are most common in real-world applications for Earth observation, where the fine-grained results are necessary for end-users to perform area estimation (e.g., acreage estimation for different types of crops in agriculture), property boundary mapping, land cover mapping, biomass estimation, and many more. For example, the USDA Cropland Data Layer (CDL) [58] provides per-pixel crop type classification to support applications such as crop rotation pattern monitoring, agricultural expansion assessment, and crop yield prediction. The ESA WorldCover dataset [15] provides global, per-pixel land cover mapping, enabling large-scale analyses of land use and land cover patterns, ecosystem distribution, and environmental change across different regions and years. Here pixel-level means that results are needed for each pixel in the input image, but does not require individual pixels as inputs. For example, semantic segmentation with U-Net falls into the pixel-level tasks here. (2) Pixel-level tasks rely most on resolution and thus can best reflect the changes by SR models, which is important for evaluating the improvements to the downstream tasks. II. R ELATED WORK 

A. Image Super-Resolution 

Traditional SR methods primarily follow task-agnostic paradigms, focusing on accurate reconstruction of high-resolution images from low-resolution inputs regardless of their usability on downstream applications. Early approaches include JOURNAL OF L ATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. 14, NO. 8, AUGUST 2021 3

interpolation-based methods [80], [83] and early learning-based techniques [24], followed by deep convolutional neural networks (CNN) such as SRCNN [14], VDSR [23], EDSR [35], and RCAN [79]. More recent work leverages transformer-based architectures such as TTSR [73], SwinIR [34], ESRT [41], HAT [8], and CFAT [50], which model long-range dependencies for improved reconstruction. In parallel, generative adversarial network (GAN)-based models, such as SRGAN [28], ESRGAN [63], Real-ESRGAN [62], and SeD [30] focus on generating photorealistic textures during SR. Diffusion-based methods, such as SR3 [52], DiffusionSR [20], and DiffusionSat [22], introduce a stochastic iterative denoising process to produce sharper details. Most recently, neural operator-based mod-els including SRNO [67] and DiffFNO [38] enable super-resolution at arbitrary scaling factors by modeling low - and high - resolution images as continuous functions. These methods are commonly evaluated using metrics such as PSNR, SSIM [66], and LPIPS [78], which assess pixel-level accuracy or perceptual similarity but do not necessarily reflect performance in downstream tasks. Although these approaches have achieved impressive visual results on benchmarks like DIV2K [1] and Flickr2K [35], their effectiveness in downstream tasks remains underexplored. 

B. Remote Sensing Image Super-Resolution 

Traditionally, the SR task for images from a single remote sensing platform is handled by an additional panchromatic band (pan-band), which is by design collected at a higher resolution to help improve the resolution of the other spectral bands. The related methods are also known as pan-sharpening. Both rule-based (e.g., GSA [2], SFIM [37]) and ML methods (e.g., PanFormer [84], MutInf [85]) pan-sharpening methods have been developed. However, pan-sharpening is limited by the resolution of the pan-band, and the characteristics of pan-band can be different than other spectral bands. For example, the 30m-resolution images from Landsat-8 come with a pan-band at 15m, which is still in the medium resolution range and lacks spatial details. To address this, image fusion methods have also been developed, which integrate images from satellite platforms with higher resolution into images captured by lower resolution platforms, such as DCSTFN [54], BiaSTF [33], and VIPSTF [61]. Beyond traditional pan-sharpening and image fusion methods, many SR architectures originally developed for natural images have been adapted to the remote sensing domain. These include CNN-based models [5], [59], transformer-based models [21], [29], diffusion-based models [43], [70], and neural operator-based models [72], [81]. More recently, foundation models have been developed for remote sensing images and sev-eral have considered SR tasks. For example, DiffusionSat [22] generates high-resolution images based on a sequence of lower-resolution images with associated metadata and the caption that describes the target high-resolution image; Text2Earth [36] guides the generation of super-resolved images by augmenting the foundation model with a trainable ControlNet [77] module that encodes the low-resolution image as conditional guidance. However, these methods mainly focus on visual fidelity, where sharper boundaries of geo-objects or events can be generated in the higher-resolution results without connecting to downstream tasks, and the evaluation still relies on traditional metrics such as PSNR and SSIM. 

C. Benchmark Datasets for Super Resolution. 

Progress in SR research has been fueled by the availability of high-quality datasets. Datasets such as DIV2K [1], Flickr2K [35], and LSDIR [32] provide synthetic pairs to enable training using downsampled high-resolution images, while real pairs have also been made available by changing the camera focus on the same scenes [6], [25]. However, these datasets do not consider remote sensing images that have a very different overhead view and a much coarser spatial resolution (e.g., meter-level) compared to regular photos taken by hand-held devices. In the remote sensing domain, the high cost of high-resolution imagery and the challenges of accurately geo-registering corresponding low-resolution data make it difficult to construct large-scale RSISR datasets [49]. As a result, most existing studies rely on synthetic datasets generated by applying bicubic downscaling to available remote sensing datasets [49]. More recently, efforts have been made to construct real-world SR datasets by simulating realistic degradations based on the imaging characteristics of spectral sensors [60]. In addition, several remote sensing SR datasets, including PROBA-V [42], SEN2VENμS [45], and WorldStrat [12] have provided paired real low- and high-resolution samples from various sensors (e.g., Landsat-8 and Sentinel-2). However, these benchmark datasets all focus on the visual appearance of super-resolved satellite images following benchmarking literature on general non-satellite images. To the best of our knowledge, no existing datasets have integrated the important aspect of downstream tasks in Earth monitoring into the benchmarks, limiting progress in developing SR methods tailored for practical, task-relevant applications. Thus, GeoSR aims to bridge a major gap in the current benchmark datasets for SR tasks using remote sensing images. III. G EO SR: F ROM VISUAL FIDELITY TO DOWNSTREAM 

TASK PERFORMANCE 

The objective of this paper is to go beyond super-resolution in remote sensing and the typical visual fidelity metrics by integrating a variety of downstream tasks from different application domains to enable direct evaluation of the utility of enhanced image sharpness in the application context. To achieve this, we will first introduce a new benchmark dataset, GeoSR-Bench, that connects the SR tasks with downstream tasks to support the evaluation, and then discuss the evaluation protocols for developing performance benchmarks and answer-ing important questions between visual fidelity and downstream task performance. More specifically, the GeoSR-Bench dataset consists of two main components as shown in Fig. 2: (1) The SR component that supports the training of SR models; and (2) The downstream task component that supports further finetuning and evaluation using a diverse set of downstream applications. In the following, Sec. III-A and Sec. III-B introduce the design of the SR and downstream task components, respectively; Sec. JOURNAL OF L ATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. 14, NO. 8, AUGUST 2021 4

TABLE I SUMMARY OF SATELLITE AND AERIAL IMAGERY PLATFORMS USED IN THIS STUDY .Platform Resolution No. of Bands Revisit Frequency Coverage Product MODIS 500 m 7 Daily Global MOD09GA.061 Terra Surface Reflectance Landsat-8 30 m 7 16 days Global Landsat 8 Level 2, Collection 2, Tier 1 Surface Reflectance Sentinel-2 10 m 12 5 days Global Sentinel-2 Level-2A Surface Reflectance NAIP 0.6 m 4 1–3 years (state-dependent) Conterminous US NAIP Product on GEE (USDA/NAIP/DOQQ) 

III-C describes additional details for data processing and quality control; and Sec. III-D discusses the evaluation protocols and main questions. 

A. Super-resolution tasks and dataset creation 

To ensure broad resolution coverage, GeoSR-Bench includes multiple widely-used and publicly available remote sensing platforms with coarse, medium, and high resolution. Table I lists the platforms that we consider here: coarse-resolution MODIS, medium resolution Landsat-8/Sentinel-2, and high-resolution NAIP. Based on these, we define two cross-platform SR tasks: (1) Coarse-to-medium: From MODIS (500m) to Landsat-8 (30m), and (2) Medium-to-high: Sentinel-2 (10m) to NAIP (0.6m). Note that MODIS itself uses different resolutions across different spectral bands, i.e., 2 bands at 250m resolution, 5 bands at 500m resolution, and others at 1000m resolution. We use 500m for MODIS for the first SR task since the set of bands in MODIS at 500m resolution overlap the most with the bands in the target Landsat-8. Additionally, this also makes the ratio of lower- to higher-resolution images the same across the two SR tasks (i.e., both need to increase the resolution by 

∼16.7 times). Overall, the two SR tasks collectively cover common SR tasks in the resolution range from 500m to 0.6m as shown in Fig. 1. These two SR tasks also cover diverse utilities. For example, the coarse-to-medium resolution SR task can help capture large-scale vegetation phenology, water monitoring, or land cover transitions, whereas the medium-to-high resolution SR task can facilitate the detection of small-scale features such as roads, buildings, and detailed vegetation structures, where the precision of spatial details directly impacts downstream task performance. There are two important considerations when building the datasets for the SR tasks. First, the pairs of images collected from the lower- and high-resolution platforms need to be both spatially and temporally aligned to allow the SR models to learn the matched patterns at higher resolution. While the spatial alignment is easy to understand as the pairs of images need to correspond to the same geographic domain, the temporal element is also important. In particular, different remote sensing platforms often operate on different acquisition schedules and revisit frequencies. If the images are too far apart, changes over time caused by reflectance difference (e.g., wetter conditions due to rainfall), vegetation dynamics, and so on may generate inconsistency in the image pairs and cause confusion in SR models. Second, the images need to be representative for training the SR models. In the SR context, it means the data should cover areas where SR is commonly needed instead of regions (e.g., tropical forests or large open water) with no clear Coincident Data Discovery              

> SR Dataset Creation
> Multi -Platform Metadata Download
> (ID, Polygon, Timestamp)
> Spatiotemporal Join
> (Same -Day, Same -Location)
> Initial Coincident Pairs
> Stratified Sampling
> (Urban, Non -Urban)
> Filtering Process
> (Remove clouds and snow )
> Final SR Datasets
> SR Dataset Construction
> Task Selection
> Downstream Task Dataset Creation
> Criteria: Sensitive to spatial
> resolution improvement
> Define regions of interest (ROIs)
> •Patches from original dataset
> •Use existing labels
> Filtering Process
> (Remove clouds and snow )
> Downstream Task
> Datasets
> Data and Label Preparation
> Retrieval coincident
> image pairs aligned
> with labels
> SR models
> Train Fine -tune & Evaluate

Fig. 2. GeoSR Dataset Construction Process Overview. 

distinction between lower- and higher- resolution images. The following sections introduce the details of a coincident data query process and land cover-based sampling to ensure the desired properties of the SR data. 

1) Spatially and temporally aligned coincident image pairs: 

Coincident pairs are defined as two images captured by different satellite platforms that (1) cover the same geographic location and (2) are acquired within a specified temporal window (e.g., within one day). Given data from platforms with different revisit intervals (e.g., daily for MODIS, 5 days for Sentinel-2, 16 days for Landsat-8, and 1–3 years for NAIP), such coincident pairs can be discovered through spatio-temporal joins across tens of millions of images. Specifically, we use Apache Sedona [4], an open-source distributed spatial-temporal computing system, to efficiently identify all coincident pairs at scale. This spatio-temporal join process does not require the full image data, which may take PBs of storage; instead, it operates solely on lightweight metadata such as image IDs, spatial footprints, and capture timestamps. We retrieve the Sentinel-2, Landsat-8, and MODIS metadata from the Google Earth Engine (GEE) API, and NAIP metadata from the seamline files provided by USDA [57] that define image boundaries and capture times. These metadata streams serve as inputs to our pipeline for discovering coincident image pairs across the two SR settings, as illustrated in Fig. 2. We further filter the coincident pairs by discarding those with minimal intersection areas (e.g., less than 60 × 60 pixels for the lower-resolution platform or 1000 × 1000 pixels for the higher-resolution platform). Since the original remote sensing image tiles are often very large (e.g., 10,000 × 10,000), we JOURNAL OF L ATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. 14, NO. 8, AUGUST 2021 5                   

> TABLE II DETAILS OF CONINCIDENT CROSS -PLATFORM SR DATASETS .Dataset Patch Spatial Coverage Low-Res Patch Size High-Res Patch Size Temporal Cover-age MODIS to Landsat-8 30,000 m ×
> 30,000 m 60 ×60 1000 ×1000 2018-2024 Sentinel-2 to NAIP 600 m ×600 m60 ×60 1000 ×1000 2018-2023

subdivide the intersection region of each coincident pair into non -overlapping patches to extract images for SR training and evaluation. The choice of the patch size is a balanced consideration of both lower- and higher-resolution platforms. Given the roughly 16 × resolution difference, a large size patch for the lower resolution image could make the corresponding patch size too large for the higher resolution image (e.g., from 

300 × 300 to 5000 × 5000 ). On the other hand, the lower resolution image cannot be too small to avoid losing spatial context information. Considering these factors, we use 60 × 60 

as the patch size for the lower-resolution platforms in each SR task, and 1000 × 1000 as the size for the higher-resolution platforms, as shown in Table II. 

2) Sampling based on land cover for more complete repre-sentation: Here we aim to make sure the SR datasets cover important land cover types or scenarios where SR is commonly needed. Since the acquisition locations of the sensing platforms are often uniformly distributed across space (e.g., continental US or global coverage depending on the platform), random sampling would make vast majority of samples in remote areas where SR is less needed, such as forest, grassland, open water, etc. These homogeneous landscapes often contain relatively lower-level of structural details and may not help SR models learn the most useful SR skills. In contrast, urban areas often only account for a very small proportion of the overall land, but they contain high-level of detailed textures where resolution enhancement tends to be more needed and effective, such as building segmentation, impervious surface mapping, and road extraction. Therefore, ensuring adequate samples of urban scenes is essential for training super-resolution models that are effective on these resolution-sensitive downstream tasks. To account for these, we apply stratified sampling based on existing land cover reference maps, and in both SR tasks, we sample urban and non-urban patches using equal proportions. For the coarse-to-medium SR task (MODIS-to-Sentinel-2), the dataset has a global coverage as both datasets are publicly available at the global scale. Here the urban areas are identified using Meta’s Global Urban Areas product [44], and any patch that either fully overlaps or has the majority of its area intersecting with urban regions in this product is classified as an urban patch. We have also explored the use of ESA WorldCover build-up classes to filter urban areas but found it leads to limited urban patches. This is because the land cover classification scheme used in ESA WorldCover excludes vegetated urban areas from the built-up mask, and we cannot simply merge the built-up class with tree cover or grassland classes as it can introduce confusion with other non-urban forest/grass-covered regions. For completeness and accuracy, we use the Meta’s Global Urban Areas product that is more focused on the urban areas that include all urban land covers. For non-urban patches, we performed uniform sampling across a diverse set of land cover types defined by the ESA WorldCover classes [15]. For the medium-to-high SR task (Sentinel-2-to-NAIP), the dataset has a US coverage, as the high-resolution USDA NAIP imagery by design provides coverage over the US. Here we use National Land Cover Database (NLCD) [13] as the base land cover map because NLCD is a publicly available land cover product focused on the US. Unlike global products (e.g., ESA WorldCover, Meta’s Global Urban Areas), NLCD provides finer-grained classification types such as developed open space, low/medium/high intensity developed areas, pri-mary/secondary/tertiary/thinned road, and deciduous/evergreen forest. These detailed classes are useful for the sampling of diverse urban/non-urban types, which can appear in the medium-to-high downstream tasks that require finer-grained labels. For urban regions, a patch is classified as urban if at least 50% of its pixels are labeled as “developed” in NLCD. Urban patches are then evenly sampled across development intensity classes (e.g., open space, low, medium, and high intensity) and key impervious surface categories (e.g., roads and energy infrastructure), which are associated with high-frequency textures and sharp edges. For non-urban regions, we evenly sample from a diverse set of land cover types, including forest, shrubland, grassland, pasture, wetlands, etc. Finally, we sample about 10,000 pairs of lower- and higher-resolution images for each of the two SR tasks, resulting in about 20,000 pairs in total and collectively covering over 9.3 million km 2 of diverse geographic regions. The spatial distributions of the image pairs for the two SR tasks are shown in Fig. 3. All the images included in the dataset have passed through additional quality control steps that will be summarized later in Sec. III-C. 

B. Downstream tasks and dataset creation 

The goal of GeoSR-Bench is to enable evaluation and com-parison of SR models in the context of real-world downstream applications. To achieve this, we integrate a diverse set of downstream tasks into the benchmark dataset. One important selection criterion for a downstream task is that the increase in additional spatial granularity must bring the potential to significantly improve the solution quality for the task. In other words, images from the higher resolution platform must have a clear advantage over images from the lower resolution platform to allow meaningful comparisons between SR models and demonstrate SR benefits. Based on this, we select five downstream tasks for each of the two SR tasks, i.e., coarse-to-medium and medium-to-high, as summarized in Tables III and IV. As explained in the scope at the end of Sec. I, all these tasks are pixel-level tasks (i.e., pixel-level labels) that can best reflect the benefits of SR. These tasks consider both classification and regression. For example, the Road Detection dataset in Table IV is for pixel-level classification, where a high spatial resolution is important to clearly see the boundaries of the roads and generate the correct segmentation masks (e.g., country roads or neighborhood roads). JOURNAL OF L ATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. 14, NO. 8, AUGUST 2021 6(a) MOD IS-to-Land sat-8 SR image pair

distribu tion 

(b) Senti nel-2-to-NA IP SR image pair

distribu ti on 

Fig. 3. Spatial distributions of image pairs in (a) MODIS-to-Landsat-8 and (b) Sentinel-2-to-NAIP SR coincident datasets. TABLE III DOWNSTREAM TASK DATASETS FOR THE MODIS TO LANDSAT -8 SETTING IN GEO SR-B ENCH . E ACH DATASET CONTAINS LABELS ALIGNED WITH COINCIDENT IMAGE PAIRS FROM A LOWER -RESOLUTION PLATFORM (MODIS) AND A HIGHER -RESOLUTION PLATFORM (L ANDSAT -8). Dataset Task Type Label Resolution Label Source Location No. of Samples Year River Semantic segmen-tation 30 m Dynamic Surface Water Extent (DSWE) [56] WWF HydroSHEDS [69] 1065 samples (852 train / 213 test) 2020 Urban Semantic segmen-tation 10 m ESA WorldCover [15] Global Urban Ar-eas [44] 1687 samples (1350 train / 337 test) 2021 Cropland Data Layers (CDL) Semantic segmen-tation 30 m Cropland Data Layer [58] US cultivated crop regions 762 samples (610 train / 152 test) 2021 Gross Primary Pro-duction (GPP) Regression (GPP estimation) 30 m Landsat GPP CONUS [47] Continental US 755 samples (604 train / 151 test) 2021 CHM-S2 Regression (canopy height) 10 m Global canopy height model [27] Global tree areas defined by ESA WorldCover [15] 1408 samples (1126 train / 282 test) 2020 TABLE IV DOWNSTREAM TASK DATASETS FOR THE SENTINEL -2 TO NAIP SETTING IN GEO SR-B ENCH . E ACH DATASET CONTAINS LABELS ALIGNED WITH COINCIDENT IMAGE PAIRS FROM A LOWER -RESOLUTION PLATFORM (E.G., S ENTINEL -2) AND A HIGHER -RESOLUTION PLATFORM (E.G., NAIP). Dataset Task Type Label Resolution Label Source Location No. of Samples Year USBuildings Semantic segmen-tation Vector (rasterized at 1 m) Microsoft Building Footprints [55] Southern Wiscon-sin 2000 patches (1600 train / 400 test) 2018 Road Detection Semantic segmen-tation Vector (rasterized with width attributes) Microsoft US Roads [46] Southern Texas 2000 patches (1600 train / 400 test) 2020 Vermont LC Semantic segmen-tation 0.5 m Vermont Land Cover [48] Vermont 2000 patches (1600 train / 400 test) 2021 ChesapeakeRSC Semantic segmen-tation 1 m Chesapeake bench-mark [51] Chesapeake Bay re-gion 2000 patches (1600 train / 400 test) 2018 CHM-NAIP Regression (canopy height) 1 m CHM-NAIP dataset [3] California 2000 patches (1600 train / 400 test) 2018-2021 

On the other hand, the CHM-NAIP dataset is for pixel-level regression to predict the canopy height values of geospatial objects, where high-resolution texture is important to determine the fine-granularity variation of heights in both man-made and natural objects (e.g., buildings, trees). The downstream tasks in Table III capture events that can be effectively represented at 30m resolution, such as the boundaries of urban areas, river systems, and crop fields. On the other hand, the tasks in Table IV require much higher resolution details to capture the fine-granularity details of geospatial events and objects such as buildings and road boundaries, as well as local vegetation dynamics. These tasks span diverse geographic regions and cover a variety of different downstream applications. In general, classification labels are more commonly available compared to regression, as pixel-level labels with continuous changes over an entire study area are more challenging to generate than discrete class labels, we include two regression tasks in Table III and one in Table IV based on data available and appropriate for our evaluation, as well as the coverage of different use cases. In addition, in real-world Earth monitoring applications, the resolution of labels can vary especially at high resolution, depending on the labor and sensing cost (e.g., high-resolution aerial LiDAR). Thus, for the downstream tasks for coarse-to-high resolution, several tasks have labels at 1m resolution instead of the exact original NAIP image resolution at 0.6m. For these tasks, we evaluate the model performance at the original label resolution. Considering the resolution gap from 10m to 0.6m between Sentinel-2 and NAIP images, the 1m resolution is still quite effective in demonstrating the resolution impact. For the labels (e.g., roads, buildings, croplands), we find and collect them from existing open datasets. Most datasets JOURNAL OF L ATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. 14, NO. 8, AUGUST 2021 7

come with both labels and images (from the higher-resolution platforms in the two SR tasks), and we use the same coincident data search process described in Sec. III-A to identify images from the lower-resolution platforms (i.e., MODIS and Sentinel-2 in the two SR tasks, respectively) that are closest to the acquisition date of the image from the higher-resolution platform to form the pairs of images needed for the SR part. For datasets that only share the labels but not the images, we use the spatial and temporal information from the metadata to find the lower-resolution images, and the same coincident data search approach to further obtain the higher-resolution images to form the pairs. In all cases, we verify the consistency between labels and images to ensure accurate downstream evaluation. These pairs of images for the SR task in each downstream task will be used for finetuning the SR models and evaluating the quality of super-resolved images. For example, both images in a pair are needed to compare the performance of super-resolved images with original higher-resolution images on each downstream task, while they can also be used to evaluate the visual fidelity. Sec. III-D lists all the major evaluation questions and comparisons we will carry out to better understand the model performances in the context of downstream tasks. For each downstream task, we sample 2,000 triplets of the higher-resolution image, lower-resolution image, and pixel-level label image (e.g., 1000 × 1000 in size) to maintain the ease-of-use of the overall GeoSR-Bench with 10 downstream tasks. For datasets with fewer than 2,000 images in total, we use all of the available data. Overall, we have about 16,000 triplets for the downstream task component. 

C. Data processing and quality control 

When constructing both the SR and downstream task datasets, ensuring spatially and temporally aligned coincident image pairs is necessary but not sufficient, because the spectral information captured by different platforms can still vary significantly due to differences in acquisition conditions, creating additional difficulty for SR. For example, in the Sentinel-2-to-NAIP SR task, Sentinel-2 imagery is acquired by satellites observing through the atmosphere, making it subject to atmospheric scattering, absorption, and illumination effects. In contrast, NAIP imagery is collected by aerial platforms flying below most of the atmosphere and cloud cover, and is therefore largely free from atmospheric interference. In the MODIS-to-Landsat-8 SR setting, although both platforms are satellite-based, their observations are still affected by atmospheric distortions, which can vary depending on viewing conditions such as solar and sensor angles. These viewing geometries typically differ across platforms, even when images are spatially and temporally coincident, complicating spectral alignment. To improve cross-platform spectral comparability and reduce atmospheric effects that can vary spatially and temporally, we use surface reflectance products whenever available. For satellite-based sensors such as MODIS, Landsat-8, and Sentinel-2, we utilize atmospherically corrected surface reflectance products provided in GEE, with dataset identifiers listed in Table II. Although NAIP does not provide a formal surface reflectance product in GEE, its low-altitude, cloud-free acquisition conditions result in relatively stable spectral characteristics, making it suitable as a high-resolution target for training SR models. Additionally, we retain all available spectral bands of the selected product for each platform as all of the bands can contain auxiliary information to reconstruct spatial details with certain types (e.g., shortwave infrared or red-edge bands can help the SR model better reconstruct land cover types such as vegetation, built-up areas, and water bodies and enhance spatial detail). When different bands from a platform have different native resolutions, we upsample them to the highest available resolution in the product using bilinear interpolation to retain the maximum possible spatial detail, which is commonly done in practice. For example, Sentinel-2’s 20m and 60 m bands are upsampled to the highest 10m resolution to match its RGB and NIR bands; similar data processing is performed for MODIS and Landsat-8 products. For NAIP, as their native resolution varies from 1–2m in older collections to 0.6m or higher in more recent years (e.g., after 2021 for most regions), we use uniformly resampled 0.6m versions available in GEE to ensure spatial consistency across years and regions. For the temporal consistency, we restrict all datasets (both coincident image pairs for different settings and corresponding labels) to those collected from 2018 onward. This is to ensure that all satellite-based platforms used in this study provide atmospherically corrected surface reflectance (e.g., the availability of Sentinel-2 surface reflectance products begins in March 2017). Another source of spectral misalignment arises from different weather conditions, such as clouds and snow, whose dynamic and scene-obscuring nature introduces inconsistencies between coincident image pairs acquired at different times (e.g., 1 day). Moreover, areas covered by extensive clouds or snow often exhibit limited or uniform texture (e.g., scenes entirely covered by clouds or snow), making them less informative for SR training. To avoid that, we apply platform-specific cloud and snow filtering using the quality assessment (QA) information provided with each dataset. For satellite-based sensors such as MODIS, Landsat-8, and Sentinel-2, which acquire imagery above the atmosphere, we use the corresponding cloud and snow masks or QA bands (e.g., the MODIS’s state_1km band, the Landsat-8’s QA_PIXEL band, and the Sentinel-2’s QA60 band with cloud probability masks [17]) to identify and exclude cloudy pixels and retain only cloud-free patches. We retain only image patches with minimal cloud and snow presence by applying strict thresholds (e.g., less than 0.1%) to balance between data quality and the number of usable image pairs. Notably, a threshold of zero is avoided, as it would be overly restrictive and substantially limit the availability of valid coincident pairs. For NAIP images, as they are collected by aerial platforms flying below cloud layers, they are generally free of cloud contamination. NAIP is also largely free from snow because it’s collected during the leaf-on, snow-free months, with weather-aware flight planning that prioritizes clear, ground-visible conditions. Because of these, no further cloud or snow filtering is applied to NAIP imagery. After applying cloud and snow filtering as an initial quality control step, we conduct several rounds of visual inspection to improve the dataset quality further. Although the quality assessment (QA) information provided with each product is JOURNAL OF L ATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. 14, NO. 8, AUGUST 2021 8

generally accurate, thin or residual clouds and snow can still remain in some samples. We manually inspect the filtered image pairs to identify any remaining cloud or snow contamination. In addition, we check for significant mismatches between higher-and lower-resolution images caused by temporal changes such as human activities or abrupt natural events (e.g., floods or landslides), which may occur even within short temporal windows. For datasets where downstream labels are available but the corresponding images are not directly paired, we rely on spatial and temporal metadata to identify coincident lower- and higher-resolution imagery. However, misalignments between imagery and labels may still occur given the chance of label errors or temporal changes in the landscape. To address this, we manually inspect these samples and remove any triplets exhibiting misalignment between higher/lower-resolution images and labels. 

D. Evaluation protocol and questions 

GeoSR-Bench enables the evaluation of SR models in the context of downstream applications. This section describes the high-level protocol of the evaluation set-ups and main evaluation questions we aim to answer via the new benchmark dataset. 

1) Evaluation set-ups: Given the two main components of the GeoSR-Bench dataset, i.e., the SR task component and the downstream task component, we use a two-stage evaluation that first trains only the SR models using the SR datasets, and then finetunes and tests the SR models’ performance on downstream tasks, in combination with a set of corresponding downstream task models. First, for the SR tasks, we include a diverse set of methods, covering direct transformer-based approaches, GAN-based frameworks, neural operator models, and diffusion models, with the full list of the 9 models in the experiment section (Sec. IV). We train the SR models separately for the two different SR tasks, given the largely different resolution ranges they represent and target. This also aligns well with the practical scenarios, as there exists a large volume of images for each of these remote sensing platforms and each platform often uses their own dedicated models for product generation. For each of the two SR tasks (i.e., coarse-to-medium and medium-to-high), we use all samples in the SR datasets to train the models. This stage serves as a pre-training step that produces SR models with strong generalization across diverse land-cover types and imaging conditions (e.g., solar zenith/azimuth angles, seasonal phenology), enabling better adaptation to downstream tasks. Second, for integration with the downstream tasks, we split the model preparation process into three steps:  

> •

SR model finetuning: Since the distribution of images over different types of land cover and geographic regions depends on the nature of each downstream task (e.g., urban vs rural areas), we further finetune the SR models for each of the downstream tasks, respectively, using 80% of higher/lower-resolution image pairs in the downstream task data for finetuning (with 10% of the finetuning data reserved for validation) and the remaining 20% for evaluation.  

> •

Downstream task model training: The SR models by de-sign focus on enhancing image resolution instead of the             

> TABLE V EVALUATION SETUPS ENABLED BY GEO SR-B ENCH AND THEIR CORRESPONDING RESEARCH QUESTIONS .Evaluation Setup Goal and Related Research Questions SR results on down-stream datasets
> Goal :Evaluate SR image quality under task-specific domains.
> Questions : SR-Q1, SR-Q2, EM-Q1, EM-Q2 Downstream results on LR images
> Goal : Serve as the lower bound of task perfor-mance.
> Questions : DT-Q2 Downstream results on HR images
> Goal : Serve as the upper bound of task perfor-mance.
> Questions : DT-Q2 Downstream results on SR images
> Goal : Evaluate the effectiveness of SR images on downstream tasks.
> Questions : DT-Q1, DT-Q2, EM-Q1, EM-Q2

downstream tasks. Thus, downstream task based models are needed to connect the SR images to the downstream results, and we use 3 widely-used models for pixel-level tasks to generate the final outputs for the downstream tasks: U-Net, SegFormer, and Mask2Former. Using 3 different models here allows comparisons between the SR models for downstream task performance while helping understand the effects from the downstream task models. These downstream task models are trained using the higher-resolution images with the corresponding labels, as an initial training step.  

> •

Downstream task model finetuning: Since the generated SR images from the SR models will be different from the true higher-resolution images, the initial downstream task models trained for each downstream task need to be further finetuned to adapt to the generated images for each of the SR models. For each individual dataset, we use the labels from the same training set to pair with the generated SR images for finetuning. In total, we have 9 SR models, 5 downstream tasks, and 3 downstream task models for each of the 2 SR tasks. Given all the training and finetuning, this leads to 270 different model paths. 

2) Evaluation questions: Using all the models from the evaluation set-ups, we can obtain multiple sets of results for different comparison purposes as summarized in Table V, where all results are test results on corresponding datasets: (1) SR results on the downstream task datasets; (2) Downstream task results using original lower-resolution images; (3) Down-stream task results using original higher-resolution images; (4) Downstream task results using the generated higher-resolution images. These results allow us to answer important questions to un-derstand the performance of the SR models on the downstream tasks and how well the standard visual fidelity metrics can reflect the downstream task utility. Specifically, here we list the overarching questions we aim to answer via GeoSR-Bench:  

> •

SR question 1 (SR-Q1) : How do different types of SR models perform on remote sensing images using visual fidelity metrics?  

> •

SR-Q2 : How well do different types of models generate authentic details for different land cover types? JOURNAL OF L ATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. 14, NO. 8, AUGUST 2021 9 

> •

Downstream task question 1 (DT-Q1) : How effective are the super-resolved images for the downstream tasks and how do the best-performing models change?  

> •

DT-Q2 : Can the super-resolved images improve downstream task performance over original lower-resolution images (expected lower bound), and how close can they get to the performance of original higher-resolution images (expected upper bound)?  

> •

Evaluation metric question 1 (EM-Q1) : How reflective are the visual fidelity metrics on SR models’ performance on downstream tasks? In other words, how well do they correlate in terms of metric value and rankings?  

> •

EM-Q2 : Under which scenarios are the rankings from visual fidelity metrics effective or ineffective in indicating rankings based on downstream task utility? IV. E XPERIMENTS 

To address the evaluation questions outlined in Sec. III-D using GeoSR-Bench, we conduct a series of experiments includ-ing SR performance evaluation, downstream task evaluation, and metric analysis. In the following, Sec. IV-A introduces the SR models and downstream task models used throughout the experiments. Sec. IV-B presents the SR results based on visual fidelity metrics, including PSNR and SSIM. Sec. IV-C presents the downstream task results and compares the performance of models trained on SR images against those trained on the original lower- and higher-resolution images. Finally, Sec. IV-D evaluates the relationship between visual fidelity metrics and the downstream task performance. 

A. Candidate Methods 

The following lists the candidate models included for SR and downstream tasks, respectively. 

1) Super-Resolution: We select representative SR models across four different categories, where several of the models may include features spanning over categories: (1) Transformer-based models: Models that use a transformer-based architecture to extract global context information for SR; (2) Neural operator-based models: Models treat images as samples from continuous functions and learn mappings between function spaces, rather than fixed-resolution grids; (3) GAN-based models: Models that optimize adversarial losses to produce high-resolution images that are perceptually realistic; and (4) Diffusion-based models: Models generate high-resolution images through a denoising diffusion process, which iteratively refines random noise into detailed outputs conditioned on low-resolution inputs. The list of candidate models includes:  

> •

ATD [75]: Transformer-based architecture with an Adaptive Token Dictionary (ATD) module to address the limited receptive field of window-based self-attention.  

> •

RGT [10]: Recursive Generalization Transformer (RGT) that recursively aggregates local input features into a global representations that benefit the high-resolution image recon-struction.  

> •

CFAT [50]: Transformer-based architecture with a non-overlapping triangular window-based local attention to miti-gate boundary-level distortion of the conventional rectangular window approaches.  

> •

CAMixer [64]: A SR architecture with content-aware routing that can dynamically assign simple areas to convolution and complex areas to self-attention.  

> •

SRNO [67]: A model that learns to map low- and high-resolution images as continuous functions, enabling resolution-agnostic super-resolution.  

> •

ESRGAN [63]: Enhanced Super-Resolution Generative Adversarial Networks with an improved perceptual loss for better texture recovery.  

> •

SeD [30]: A GAN-based model with a semantic-aware dis-criminator which incorporates the semantics from pretrained vision models as the condition.  

> •

BiDiff [9]: A binarized diffusion SR model that reduces the memory and computational overhead of standard diffusion models while preserving performance.  

> •

UPSR [76]: A diffusion model that adjusts the noise level across spatial regions based on estimated uncertainty, applying lower noise to smooth areas with low uncertainty. 

2) Downstream Tasks: To evaluate the effectiveness of super-resolved images on downstream tasks, we consider the following models, which are widely used and have shown good performances in many real-world pixel-level tasks:  

> •

UNet: An encoder–decoder CNN architecture with skip connections, known for its effectiveness in dense pixel-wise prediction tasks and widespread use in remote sensing applications.  

> •

SegFormer (SegF) [71]: A transformer-based model that combines a hierarchical encoder with lightweight decoders, offering strong segmentation performance while being com-putationally efficient.  

> •

Swin Transformer (Swin) [39]: A transformer-based model that captures localized representations by restricting self-attention to shifted local windows for efficient feature extraction. We attach a segmentation head by concatenating multi-scale features from all stages, followed by additional convolutional layers for prediction. 

B. Performance on Super-Resolution with Visual Fidelity Metrics 

Following the evaluation questions from SR to downstream tasks (Sec. III-D 2), we start with the SR performance using traditional visual fidelity metrics including PSNR and SSIM. PSNR quantifies the pixel-wise accuracy between the super-resolved image and the ground-truth high-resolution image, and SSIM assesses perceptual similarity by comparing luminance, contrast, and structural information within local image patches. These metrics are widely adopted in both natural image SR benchmarks (e.g., Set5 [14], Set14 [74], DIV2K [1]) and remote sensing SR benchmarks (e.g., WorldStrat [12], PROBA-V [42]) due to their simplicity and interpretability. Tables VI and VII demonstrate the PSNR and SSIM results across the evaluated SR models on testing datasets of the downstream tasks. Overall, the MODIS-to-Landsat-8 downstream tasks show higher PSNR and SSIM values than the Sentinel-2-to-NAIP tasks, likely because Landsat-8 imagery is spatially less detailed and contains fewer high-frequency structures than NAIP as the training target, making it easier JOURNAL OF L ATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. 14, NO. 8, AUGUST 2021 10 

TABLE VI PSNR ( DB) ON DOWNSTREAM DATASETS ACROSS THE TWO SR TASKS .SR Task Dataset ATD RGT CFAT CAMixer SRNO BiDiff UPSR SeD ESRGAN MODIS to Landsat-8 River 32.83 32.80 29.98 32.61 32.68 8.47 31.07 31.80 28.70 Urban 30.76 30.68 28.19 30.54 30.67 8.81 29.51 29.68 27.00 CDL 30.01 29.94 28.00 29.91 29.95 10.01 28.79 28.43 26.62 GPP 31.13 31.02 28.99 30.96 31.05 8.76 29.82 30.05 27.39 CHM-S2 35.38 35.45 33.19 35.19 35.34 5.48 33.85 34.01 31.53 Sentinel-2 to NAIP USBuildings 19.07 19.15 19.00 19.06 18.94 14.85 18.15 18.79 16.21 Road Detection 17.89 18.28 17.76 17.87 17.77 10.33 17.44 17.92 15.65 VermontLC 18.98 19.24 18.83 18.84 18.76 15.19 18.30 18.40 16.41 ChesapeakeRSC 17.88 18.05 17.90 17.85 17.84 13.54 17.34 17.82 15.48 CHM-NAIP 29.00 29.15 29.16 28.62 29.21 17.77 25.26 26.69 23.78 TABLE VII SSIM ON DOWNSTREAM DATASETS ACROSS THE TWO SR TASKS .SR Task Dataset ATD RGT CFAT CAMixer SRNO BiDiff UPSR SeD ESRGAN MODIS to Landsat-8 River 0.77 0.77 0.73 0.77 0.77 0.14 0.74 0.75 0.63 Urban 0.71 0.71 0.68 0.71 0.71 0.11 0.68 0.69 0.59 CDL 0.73 0.73 0.71 0.73 0.73 0.15 0.70 0.70 0.59 GPP 0.75 0.75 0.72 0.74 0.75 0.12 0.72 0.71 0.63 CHM-S2 0.82 0.82 0.79 0.81 0.82 0.07 0.79 0.79 0.74 Sentinel-2 to NAIP USBuildings 0.44 0.45 0.44 0.44 0.44 0.35 0.39 0.41 0.32 Road Detection 0.37 0.38 0.37 0.37 0.37 0.29 0.33 0.34 0.26 VermontLC 0.32 0.33 0.33 0.33 0.32 0.28 0.30 0.27 0.22 ChesapeakeRSC 0.24 0.24 0.23 0.24 0.23 0.18 0.21 0.22 0.15 CHM-NAIP 0.72 0.72 0.72 0.72 0.72 0.61 0.58 0.68 0.60 NAIP Target ATD SR Result SeD SR Result     

> PSNR: 17.22
> SSIM: 0.34
> PSNR: 16.53
> SSIM: 0.28
> PSNR: 17.34
> SSIM: 0.43
> PSNR: 16.98
> SSIM: 0.39
> Sentinel -2 Input

Fig. 4. PSNR and SSIM do not always align with visual perception in SR. The results are from the test set of the USBuildings dataset. 

to reconstruct. Among SR models, the transformer-based (e.g., ATD and RGT) and neural operator-based models (e.g., SRNO) show higher PSNR and SSIM, whereas GAN-based models (e.g., SeD and ESRGAN) yield lower scores, and diffusion-based models perform the worst under these metrics. This can be attributed to the different training objectives of these SR models: the transformer-based and neural operator-based models rely on pixel-wise L1 loss, which directly minimizes the average absolute difference between the predicted and ground-truth pixels, thus favoring pixel-wise difference-based metrics such as PSNR. On the other hand, GANs and diffusion models optimize objectives that emphasize perceptual realism or generative diversity rather than strict pixel-level accuracy, leading to outputs that are visually plausible but may exhibit larger spectral or texture differences from the ground truth. By comparing SR performance across datasets, we can eval-uate how well SR models reconstruct details for different land covers that each dataset focuses on. In the MODIS-to–Landsat-8 task, the tree/forest-focused CHM-S2 dataset achieves the highest PSNR and SSIM, suggesting that forested areas are relatively spectrally and texturally homogeneous, making them easier to reconstruct. The River dataset follows, likely because of its relative spectral homogeneity of water surfaces. For other datasets, such as Urban , CDL , and GPP , they contain more complex and heterogeneous land covers, making them harder to reconstruct and resulting in lower PSNR and SSIM values. The Urban dataset includes complex textures and sharp edges associated with man-made structures, and cropland in CDL 

consists of fine-grained, spatially heterogeneous field patterns. The GPP dataset includes mixed land cover types, making it more challenging than datasets dominated by a single dominant class, such as River or CHM-S2 . A similar trend is observed in the Sentinel-2–to-NAIP task. The tree-focused CHM-NAIP 

dataset achieves the highest PSNR and SSIM, followed by datasets dominated by single major land cover types, such as 

USBuildings and Road Detection . Datasets with highly mixed land covers, such as VermontLC and ChesapeakeRSC , are more difficult to reconstruct and exhibit relatively lower PSNR and SSIM values. It is important to note that, despite their widespread adoption in SR evaluation, PSNR and SSIM are known to correlate imperfectly with human perception. Prior work [53], [68], [78] shows that both metrics can favor over-smoothed or blurry reconstructions that align with pixel values or local structural statistics, but may not be visually desirable in SR tasks. As illustrated in Fig. 4, the SeD model generates more perceptually detailed outputs, but receives lower PSNR and SSIM scores compared to the more blurry outputs from the ATD model. JOURNAL OF L ATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. 14, NO. 8, AUGUST 2021 11 

TABLE VIII PERFORMANCE OF PIXEL -LEVEL PREDICTION MODELS EVALUATED ON MODIS-TO -L ANDSAT -8 DOWNSTREAM TASKS (AVERAGED OVER THREE INDEPENDENT RUNS ). F OR BINARY CLASSIFICATION DATASETS SUCH AS RIVER , WE CALCULATE THE F1-SCORE OF THE TARGET CLASS . F OR MULTICLASS DATASETS SUCH AS URBAN LC AND CDL, WE CALCULATE THE MEAN F1-SCORE OVER ALL CLASSES . F OR REGRESSION DATASETS GPP AND 

TEMPERATURE , WE CALCULATE THE MEAN ABSOLUTE ERROR (MAE) AS THE EVALUATION METRIC .Datasets Predictive MODIS Super-resolution models LS8 (Eval. Metric) Models ATD RGT CFAT CAMixer SRNO BiDiff UPSR SeD ESRGAN River (F1 ↑)UNet 0.68 0.74 0.73 0.72 0.73 0.74 0.56 0.69 0.72 0.67 0.95 SegF 0.65 0.73 0.75 0.73 0.74 0.74 0.66 0.70 0.72 0.68 0.94 Swin 0.74 0.74 0.74 0.74 0.73 0.74 0.61 0.70 0.72 0.67 0.94 Urban LC (Mean F1 ↑)UNet 0.34 0.32 0.31 0.31 0.31 0.32 0.23 0.29 0.28 0.26 0.44 SegF 0.35 0.39 0.38 0.37 0.36 0.38 0.28 0.32 0.33 0.29 0.50 Swin 0.41 0.39 0.38 0.37 0.37 0.39 0.27 0.33 0.35 0.29 0.49 CDL (Mean F1 ↑)UNet 0.45 0.39 0.39 0.37 0.37 0.41 0.16 0.25 0.16 0.22 0.57 SegF 0.43 0.49 0.45 0.47 0.47 0.48 0.21 0.33 0.30 0.18 0.65 Swin 0.52 0.50 0.49 0.49 0.51 0.50 0.20 0.34 0.36 0.21 0.66 GPP (MAE ↓, ×10 −2)UNet 3.26 2.17 2.19 2.31 2.15 2.13 2.84 2.40 2.57 2.48 2.89 SegF 3.18 2.65 2.64 2.73 2.38 2.45 2.61 2.58 2.68 3.35 2.85 Swin 3.12 2.24 2.17 2.38 2.22 2.20 2.95 2.95 2.33 2.58 2.82 CHM-S2 (MAE ↓)UNet 6.74 5.22 5.36 5.86 5.39 5.18 8.04 6.03 6.10 6.50 5.16 SegF 7.14 4.93 4.88 5.38 5.01 4.99 7.78 5.49 5.61 6.05 5.14 Swin 6.41 5.09 5.05 5.54 5.14 5.17 7.47 5.56 5.63 6.15 4.99 Note: SR downstream task performance that surpasses the MODIS baseline is colored in green. ATD 

> RGT
> CFAT
> CAMixer
> SRNO
> BiDiff
> UPSR
> SeD
> ESRGAN
> -0.05
> 0.00
> 0.05
> 0.10
> 0.15
> 0.20
> 0.25
> 0.30
> Relative Perfermance
> River
> ATD
> RGT
> CFAT
> CAMixer
> SRNO
> BiDiff
> UPSR
> SeD
> ESRGAN
> -0.10
> -0.05
> 0.00
> 0.05
> 0.10
> 0.15
> Urban LC
> ATD
> RGT
> CFAT
> CAMixer
> SRNO
> BiDiff
> UPSR
> SeD
> ESRGAN
> -0.30
> -0.20
> -0.10
> 0.00
> 0.10
> 0.20
> CDL
> ATD
> RGT
> CFAT
> CAMixer
> SRNO
> BiDiff
> UPSR
> SeD
> ESRGAN
> -0.010
> -0.005
> 0.000
> 0.005
> 0.010
> 0.015
> 0.020
> GPP
> ATD
> RGT
> CFAT
> CAMixer
> SRNO
> BiDiff
> UPSR
> SeD
> ESRGAN
> -3.00
> -2.00
> -1.00
> 0.00
> 1.00
> 2.00
> 3.00
> CHM-S2
> Landsat-8 baseline
> MODIS baseline

Fig. 5. Relative performance comparison across SR models on the MODIS-to-Landsat-8 downstream tasks using SegFormer as the downstream model. Relative Performance from the original MODIS imagery (expected lower bound) is adjusted to 0, and the performance of the original Landsat-8 imagery (expected upper bound) is expressed as the improvement over the lower bound, indicated by the dashed lines. For regression datasets using MAE metric, the MAE values are sign-flipped so that higher values indicate better performance, aligning with the direction of classification metrics. Different groups of SR models are shown in different colors for clarity. 

Given these limitations, our dataset enables the evaluation of SR models not only in terms of visual fidelity but also through their downstream task performance, providing a more application-oriented assessment of SR effectiveness. 

C. Downstream Task Evaluation 1) Downstream Task Performance for the MODIS-to-Landsat-8 SR: Table VIII presents the results on the pixel-wise classification and regression downstream tasks under the MODIS-to-Landsat-8 SR task. For each downstream dataset, downstream task performance is evaluated and compared across the original MODIS inputs, the generated SR images, and the original Landsat-8 (LS8) images. To enhance result robustness, for each evaluation case we train the pixel-level prediction models three times, and report performance averaged over the three runs. In Table VIII, the cells with a green background are cases where the SR images improve downstream task performance compared to the baseline lower-resolution images. As we can see, there are still many cases where the downstream task performance based on super-resolved images is lower than that of the lower resolution images. As discussed in Sec. III-D ,the downstream task models were finetuned using the SR images, so the degradation in performance is not simply caused by distribution shifts caused by SR, but more likely by the incorrect SR patterns generated that have lower alignment with labels. Among the classification tasks, the River dataset exhibits the greatest number of improvements, along with the largest performance gain of nearly 10%. For the other two datasets, the largest performance gains from SR models range from 4% to 6% in F1 scores (including mean F1 scores). Among the three downstream models, SegFormer accounts for the largest number of downstream improvements compared to the other two. Despite the gains, the performance gaps between SR and original higher resolution images remain large. Across SR model types, transformer and neural operators-based models lead to most downstream improvements and diffusion-based models generally lag behind, due to their higher spectral and texture variability in the reconstruction. Among all SR models, JOURNAL OF L ATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. 14, NO. 8, AUGUST 2021 12 

ATD achieves the best F1 scores in most scenarios, though its performance over other transformer-based models (e.g., RGT) is small. In contrast, BiDiff and ESRGAN generally had lower downstream task performance, with performance often below the MODIS baseline, due to a higher level of mismatching details and spectral inaccuracies from both models. For regression tasks on the GPP and CHM-S2 datasets, the performance improvements are more pervasive than those on the classification tasks. Most SR models achieve lower prediction errors than the original lower-resolution inputs, with RGT most frequently delivering the best performance. Notably, in rare cases, the best-performing SR models even outperform the high-resolution Landsat-8 baselines. One possible reason is that SR methods produce cleaner and more consistent outputs than real Landsat-8 imagery, reducing spectral noises that can degrade model performance, while still introducing enough fine-grained structure to improve predictions. Fig. 5 compares the performance of SR images relative to the performance of original lower-resolution MODIS and higher-resolution Landsat-8 images across the five downstream tasks. We select SegFormer as the downstream model in this figure because it shows the largest performance improvements over the lower-resolution baselines among the three downstream task models. Different groups of SR models (i.e., transformer-based, neural-operator-based, diffusion-based, and GAN-based models) are shown in different colors for easier visual sep-aration. We calculate the relative performance of SR using 

Psr −Plower , where Psr is the downstream task performance of an SR model, and Plower is the downstream task performance of the original lower-resolution MODIS images. For reference, we adjust the MODIS baseline to zero and the Landsat-8 baseline to Phigher − Plower (shown as dashed lines), where 

Phigher is the performance of the original Landsat-8 images. For regression datasets, the performance values (e.g, MAE) are 

sign-flipped so that results have the same direction as those from classification tasks. Overall, a substantial performance gap remains between SR models and the original higher-resolution imagery, particularly for classification datasets. The best-performing models such as ATD and SRNO only recover less than one-third of the relative performance gap between the lower- and higher-resolution imagery in most cases, while BiDiff and ESRGAN often show negative relative performance. This highlights considerable room for improvement in the downstream utility of SR methods. 

2) Downstream Task Performance for the Sentinel-2-to-NAIP SR: Table IX presents the results on the pixel-wise downstream datasets for the Sentinel-2 to NAIP SR. In this task, the higher-resolution NAIP and SR images have limited four bands but much finer spatial resolution (0.6m) that is smaller than most common objects (e.g., buildings, roads, and trees), making texture information more important for the downstream tasks. For classification downstream tasks, compared to the MODIS-to-Landsat-8 setting, there are more cases in which SR-based downstream task performance surpasses the lower-resolution baseline, likely because Sentinel-2 inputs provide richer spatial (i.e., 10m vs. 500m), enabling SR models to more effectively recover spatial structures. Among downstream models, Seg-Former still accounts for the majority of improvements over the lower-resolution baseline. Across SR models, the GAN-based SeD model achieves the strongest downstream gains in this SR setting, owing to its superior ability to recover fine spatial details (as illustrated in Fig. 4) that are more important in NAIP-based downstream tasks, with improvements ranging from 4% to over 30%. Despite the improvements over lower-resolution baselines, substantial performance gaps remain compared to the original high-resolution NAIP imagery. These gaps are larger on binary classification tasks (e.g., USBuilding 

and Road Detection ) than multiclass tasks (e.g., Vermont LC 

and ChesapeakeRSC ). This may be because multiclass tasks benefit more from globally restored textures and broader spatial context in SR images, whereas binary tasks depend on specific objects occupying only small local regions, which SR models may consider less during the training process. On the regression dataset CHM-NAIP , most SR images do not significantly improve performance over lower-resolution inputs. This is primarily due to the prevalence of fine-scale tree structures (e.g., low shrubs) in this dataset, which are challenging to reconstruct accurately through SR and are essential for precise height prediction. Although certain models (e.g., BiDiff) can generate visually detailed SR images that recover small trees, these reconstructed details may not align well with the actual tree locations in the original NAIP imagery or with the ground-truth height labels, resulting in limited performance. Fig. 6 shows the relative performance from different SR models on the Sentinel-2-to-NAIP downstream tasks. Compared to the MODIS-to-Landsat-8 results in Fig. 5, SR models in this setting exhibit larger relative improvements over the lower-resolution baselines. In particular, the SeD model recovers over 50% of the gap on the Road Detection dataset. Nevertheless, large gaps remain between SR images and the high-resolution NAIP baselines, underscoring the need for SR models that are designed and optimized with the awareness of downstream tasks. 

D. Do Visual Fidelity SR Metrics Imply Downstream Task Performance? 

Given both visual fidelity metrics and downstream task performance across a diverse set of SR models and tasks, one question to be answered is whether the visual fidelity metrics are reflective on SR models’ performance on downstream tasks, as these metrics are often used to compare and rank SR models for SR research in both general and remote sensing cases. To address that, we calculate the Pearson correlation between PSNR/SSIM and downstream task performance across the 10 benchmark datasets. There are several important aspects that we need to consider in the correlation evaluation: (1) Models with performances that are substantially lower than the others tend to dominate the correlation value, as the large distance between a single low-performing model and others’ can easily create a global trend, making the differences between other models look insignificant (or noise-like). For example, a very low-performing SR model will likely cause very low downstream tasks scores as well, creating a low-low anchor point in the SR-vs-downstream task scatter plot. If this low-low anchor is far from other models’ performance in this plot, a JOURNAL OF L ATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. 14, NO. 8, AUGUST 2021 13 

TABLE IX PERFORMANCE OF PIXEL -LEVEL PREDICTION MODELS EVALUATED ON SENTINEL -2-TO -NAIP DOWNSTREAM TASKS (AVERAGED OVER THREE INDEPENDENT RUNS ). F OR BINARY CLASSIFICATION DATASETS SUCH AS USB UILDINGS AND ROAD DETECTION , WE CALCULATE THE F1-SCORE OF THE TARGET CLASS . F OR MULTICLASS DATASETS SUCH AS VERMONT LC AND CHESAPEAKE RSC, WE CALCULATE THE MEAN F1-SCORE OVER ALL CLASSES .FOR THE REGRESSION DATASET CHM-NAIP, WE CALCULATE THE MEAN ABSOLUTE ERROR (MAE) AS THE EVALUATION METRIC .Datasets Predictive S2 Super-resolution models NAIP (Eval. Metric) Models ATD RGT CFAT CAMixer SRNO BiDiff UPSR SeD ESRGAN USBuildings (F1 ↑)UNet 0.31 0.38 0.46 0.37 0.40 0.37 0.27 0.33 0.41 0.28 0.82 SegF 0.12 0.42 0.46 0.43 0.40 0.38 0.32 0.34 0.44 0.29 0.82 Swin 0.50 0.47 0.50 0.47 0.45 0.44 0.36 0.33 0.51 0.39 0.82 Road Detection (F1 ↑)UNet 0.57 0.50 0.62 0.53 0.53 0.49 0.30 0.59 0.61 0.48 0.86 SegF 0.39 0.56 0.63 0.57 0.54 0.54 0.44 0.61 0.65 0.48 0.86 Swin 0.64 0.62 0.68 0.62 0.61 0.59 0.50 0.64 0.69 0.57 0.87 Vermont LC (Mean F1 ↑)UNet 0.35 0.33 0.35 0.32 0.34 0.32 0.26 0.36 0.38 0.29 0.45 SegF 0.34 0.38 0.40 0.38 0.38 0.35 0.32 0.38 0.41 0.33 0.52 Swin 0.46 0.40 0.44 0.40 0.44 0.41 0.36 0.40 0.45 0.36 0.57 ChesapeakeRSC (Mean F1 ↑)UNet 0.36 0.31 0.33 0.30 0.30 0.30 0.24 0.32 0.34 0.30 0.43 SegF 0.28 0.35 0.35 0.35 0.35 0.35 0.29 0.35 0.36 0.31 0.47 Swin 0.39 0.40 0.40 0.38 0.38 0.39 0.32 0.37 0.40 0.35 0.51 CHM-NAIP (MAE ↓, ×10 −2)UNet 1.85 2.07 2.10 1.91 2.03 2.15 3.01 2.17 2.07 2.01 1.55 SegF 2.07 3.61 5.13 8.59 3.18 4.49 3.20 2.36 3.04 2.88 1.65 Swin 2.47 2.27 2.42 2.30 2.48 2.99 2.31 2.58 2.42 2.54 1.70 Note: SR downstream task performance that surpasses the Sentinel-2 baseline is colored in green. ATD 

> RGT
> CFAT
> CAMixer
> SRNO
> BiDiff
> UPSR
> SeD
> ESRGAN
> 0.00
> 0.10
> 0.20
> 0.30
> 0.40
> 0.50
> 0.60
> 0.70
> Relative Perfermance
> USBuildings
> ATD
> RGT
> CFAT
> CAMixer
> SRNO
> BiDiff
> UPSR
> SeD
> ESRGAN
> 0.00
> 0.10
> 0.20
> 0.30
> 0.40
> 0.50
> Road Detection
> ATD
> RGT
> CFAT
> CAMixer
> SRNO
> BiDiff
> UPSR
> SeD
> ESRGAN
> -0.05
> 0.00
> 0.05
> 0.10
> 0.15
> 0.20
> Vermont LC
> ATD
> RGT
> CFAT
> CAMixer
> SRNO
> BiDiff
> UPSR
> SeD
> ESRGAN
> -0.05
> 0.00
> 0.05
> 0.10
> 0.15
> 0.20
> ChesapeakeRSC
> ATD
> RGT
> CFAT
> CAMixer
> SRNO
> BiDiff
> UPSR
> SeD
> ESRGAN
> -0.15
> -0.12
> -0.10
> -0.08
> -0.05
> -0.02
> 0.00
> 0.02
> 0.05
> CHM-NAIP
> NAIP baseline
> Sentinel-2 baseline

Fig. 6. Relative performance comparison across SR models on the Sentinel-2-to-NAIP downstream tasks using SegFormer as the downstream model. Relative performance from the original Sentinel-2 imagery is adjusted to 0 (expected lower bound), and that from the original NAIP imagery (expected higher bound) is represented by the dashed lines as a reference. For regression datasets using MAE metric, the MAE values are sign-flipped so that higher values consistently indicate better performance, aligning with the direction of classification metrics. Different groups of SR models are shown in different colors for clarity. 

high correlation score is almost guaranteed, regardless of the relationships between the other models. (2) When evaluating a model in SR research, the main interest often lies in comparing it with the state-of-the-art models with similar and competitive performances. Very commonly the scrutiny further reduces to the comparison between one model (e.g., newly proposed) and one or two other close runner-ups. This means that, for our analysis, it is important to understand the correlation between a group of competitive, top-ranking methods to understand how well SR-based rankings align with those from actual downstream tasks. 

Top-k correlation coefficients: To further understand under what performance regimes these fidelity metrics align with downstream utility, we introduce a top-k analysis. Specifically, we first rank SR models according to their downstream task performance, and then compute the correlation between down-stream task metrics and visual fidelity metrics (PSNR/SSIM) within the top-k subset, with the results shown in Fig. 7. By progressively expanding k, we examine how the correlation evolves as lower-performing models are gradually included. 

MAE sign-flipping: For classification tasks, higher metric values indicate better performance. In contrast, regression metrics such as MAE follow the opposite direction, where lower values indicate better performance. To make the results easily comparable across tasks, we unify the direction of the metrics here by sign-flipping regression metrics (i.e., – MAE), so that higher values consistently correspond to better performance. According to Fig. 7, there exists a large proportion of cases where SR-based metrics do not correlate well with downstream-task-based metrics, with low or even negative correlation scores, especially between smaller competitive groups (i.e., when k is small such as top-3). Particularly, for the Sentinel-2-to-NAIP task, we can see that the correlation is negative or low in the majority of the cases. As k increases (e.g., top-8 or top-9), the correlations generally become positive across most cases (shown by green-shaded areas). This suggests that the correlation strengthens as the gap between better-performing and lower-performing SR models expands. However, for a group of competitive models that are normally the focus of evaluations in SR model development, the correlations JOURNAL OF L ATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. 14, NO. 8, AUGUST 2021 14 (a) MODIS -to -Landsat -8 Pearson correlations from top -k performances and PSNR (b) MODIS -to -Landsat -8 Pearson correlations from top -k performances and SSIM               

> (c) Sentinel -2-to -NAIP Pearson correlations from top -kperformances and PSNR (d) Sentinel -2-to -NAIP Pearson correlations from top -kperformances and SSIM
> Fig. 7. Pearson correlation between visual fidelity metrics (PSNR/SSIM) and downstream task performance computed within the top-kdownstream-ranked models. For the ease of comparison, we color-code the correlation values into four categories: strong positive ( r≥0.5, green), weak positive ( 0≤r < 0.5,yellow), weak negative ( −0.5≤r < 0, pink), and strong negative ( r≤ − 0.5, red).

tend to be highly unstable (shown in red, pink, and yellow shaded areas), and the ability of these visual fidelity metrics to determine downstream task performance is very limited. In those cases, small improvements in fidelity metrics do not necessarily translate into meaningful differences in downstream task performance. Therefore, PSNR/SSIM provides only limited guidance when concluding superior models for remote sensing tasks. This trend is further supported by the model ranking analysis shown in Fig. 8, which presents the Spearman’s rank correlations between model rankings from visual fidelity metrics and those from downstream task performance. Values closer to 1 indicate stronger agreement between the two ranking criteria. Similarly, the ranking correlations are relatively lower for a group of model with competitive performances (e.g., when k < 5), indicating frequent mismatches between visual quality rankings and downstream task performance rankings. V. D ISCUSSION : L IMIT OF SR FOR SUB -P IXEL TASKS 

Finally, we discuss the limit or boundary of SR for remote sensing images for sub-pixel events, which is significantly more challenging with targets smaller than a single pixel in the lower-resolution images. In this case, the spectral distinction between the target and its surroundings is significantly reduced due to signal dilution when all the fine-scale signals are aggregated into a coarser pixel. Conceptually, the effectiveness of SR is expected to be minimal for segmentation/mapping tasks where locations are essential. Due to the mixing of signals within a coarse-resolution pixel, it can be infeasible to accurately recover the true locations of the target event given the non-unique solution space. To provide a concrete example, we carry out an additional evaluation using the TreeFinder dataset [65]. This dataset aims to map individual tree mortality events (i.e., individual dead trees that may have a crown diameter of 5-10 meters), which are typically larger than NAIP’s 0.6m resolution but smaller than Sentinel-2’s 10m resolution. The original TreeFinder dataset is constructed using NAIP imagery as the input. To align with the settings of other downstream tasks, we sample 2,000 images (1,600 for training and 400 for testing) from this dataset and retrieve the corresponding coincident Sentinel-2 images as the lower-resolution inputs. Fig. 9 presents the downstream task performance on the TreeFinder dataset. We adopt SegFormer as the downstream model, given its better performance in previous tasks. As shown in the figure, the original Sentinel-2 inputs show very poor performance in detecting fine-scale tree mortality, with performance close to zero. Although SR outputs provide some improvement, the gains are minimal (e.g., 0-4%), and remain insignificant compared to the performance achieved by original NAIP imagery. The results show that for sub-pixel downstream tasks, while SR models may still reach reasonable visual fidelity metrics (e.g., PSNR values of 18.13 for ATD and 18.28 for CFAT, which are comparable to the results in Table VI), the utility for the downstream applications is limited. VI. C ONCLUSION 

This paper developed GeoSR-Bench, the first benchmark dataset for remote sensing image SR that integrates downstream tasks to evaluate the real-world utility of SR models. GeoSR-Bench provides a large-scale, globally distributed SR dataset composed of temporally aligned, spatially co-located, and JOURNAL OF L ATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. 14, NO. 8, AUGUST 2021 15 (a) MODIS -to -Landsat -8 rank correlations from top -k performances and PSNR (b) MODIS -to -Landsat -8 rank correlations from top -k performances and SSIM    

> (c) Sentinel -2-to -NAIP rank correlations from top -kperformances and PSNR (d) Sentinel -2-to -NAIP rank correlations from top -kperformances and SSIM

Fig. 8. Spearman’s rank correlation between visual fidelity metrics (PSNR/SSIM) and downstream task performance computed within the top-k downstream-ranked models. For the ease of comparison, we color-code the rank correlation values into four categories: strong positive ( r ≥ 0.5, green), weak positive (0 ≤ r < 0.5, yellow), weak negative ( −0.5 ≤ r < 0, pink), and strong negative ( r ≤ − 0.5, red). ATD 

> RGT
> CFAT
> CAMixer
> SRNO
> BiDiff
> UPSR
> SeD
> ESRGAN
> S2
> NAIP
> 0.00
> 0.02
> 0.04
> 0.06
> 0.08
> 0.38
> F1 Score
> 0.001
> TreeFinder
> S2 baseline
> NAIP baseline

Fig. 9. Downstream task performance comparison on the TreeFinder dataset using Segformer as the downstream model. 

quality-controlled image pairs from approximately 36,000 locations worldwide. The dataset covers two cross-platform SR tasks: MODIS to Landsat -8 (500m to 30m) and Sentinel - 2to NAIP (10m to 0.6m), which collectively cover spatial reso-lutions and platforms that are most widely used in downstream applications. Beyond traditional fidelity-based SR evaluation, GeoSR-Bench further incorporates 10 downstream datasets (5 per SR task) with pixel-level labels, allowing SR models to be fine-tuned for downstream tasks and evaluated using task-relevant performance metrics in applications such as land cover segmentation, infrastructure mapping, and biophysical variable estimation, bridging a critical gap left by existing SR benchmark datasets. Using GeoSR-Bench, we conducted a comprehensive evaluation of 9 representative SR models, including GAN-, transformer-, neural operator-, and diffusion-based methods, across 270 experimental settings. Our results demonstrate that improvements in traditional visual fidelity metrics such as PSNR and SSIM frequently do not always correlate with downstream task performance gains and can even exhibit negative correlations, especially for models that lead to high downstream task performance, where higher fidelity scores do not necessarily imply better task-level utility. These results highlight the limitations of existing benchmarks that rely solely on visual fidelity metrics to guide SR model development and reveal the necessity of establishing a new evaluation track by emphasizing application-driven performance. In the future, we plan to develop new models and metrics to better integrate and consider downstream tasks during the SR process, and expand the benchmarks to cover other types of remote sensing tasks. REFERENCES [1] Eirikur Agustsson and Radu Timofte. Ntire 2017 challenge on single image super-resolution: Dataset and study. In Proceedings of the IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern recognition workshops , pages 126–135, 2017. [2] Bruno Aiazzi, Stefano Baronti, and Massimo Selva. Improving component substitution pansharpening through multivariate regression of ms + pan data. IEEE Transactions on Geoscience and Remote Sensing , 45(10):3230– 3239, 2007. [3] Brady W Allred, Sarah E McCord, and Scott L Morford. Canopy height model and naip imagery pairs across conus. Scientific Data , 12(1):322, 2025. [4] Apache. Apache Sedona. https://sedona.apache.org/1.6.0/, 2025. Ac-cessed: 2025-11-05. [5] Pattathal V Arun, Krishna Mohan Buddhiraju, Alok Porwal, and Jocelyn Chanussot. Cnn-based super-resolution of hyperspectral images. IEEE Transactions on Geoscience and Remote Sensing , 58(9):6106–6121, 2020. [6] Jianrui Cai, Hui Zeng, Hongwei Yong, Zisheng Cao, and Lei Zhang. Toward real-world single image super-resolution: A new benchmark and a new model. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF international conference on computer vision , pages 3086–3095, 2019. JOURNAL OF L ATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. 14, NO. 8, AUGUST 2021 16 

[7] Shenglong Chen, Yoshiki Ogawa, Chenbo Zhao, and Yoshihide Sekimoto. Large-scale individual building extraction from open-source satellite imagery via super-resolution-based instance segmentation approach. 

ISPRS Journal of Photogrammetry and Remote Sensing , 195:129–152, 2023. [8] Xiangyu Chen, Xintao Wang, Jiantao Zhou, Yu Qiao, and Chao Dong. Activating more pixels in image super-resolution transformer. In 

Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF conference on computer vision and pattern recognition , pages 22367–22377, 2023. [9] Zheng Chen, Haotong Qin, Yong Guo, Xiongfei Su, Xin Yuan, Linghe Kong, and Yulun Zhang. Binarized diffusion model for image super-resolution. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems ,37:30651–30669, 2024. [10] Zheng Chen, Yulun Zhang, Jinjin Gu, Linghe Kong, and Xiaokang Yang. Recursive generalization transformer for image super-resolution. arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.06373 , 2023. [11] Cecilia N Clark and Fabio Pacifici. A solar panel dataset of very high resolution satellite imagery to support the sustainable development goals. 

Scientific Data , 10(1):636, 2023. [12] Julien Cornebise, Ivan Oršoli´ c, and Freddie Kalaitzis. Open high-resolution satellite imagery: The worldstrat dataset–with application to super-resolution. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems ,35:25979–25991, 2022. [13] Jon Dewitz. National land cover database (nlcd) 2021 products, 2023. U.S. Geological Survey data release. [14] Chao Dong, Chen Change Loy, Kaiming He, and Xiaoou Tang. Learning a deep convolutional network for image super-resolution. In Computer Vision–ECCV 2014: 13th European Conference, Zurich, Switzerland, September 6-12, 2014, Proceedings, Part IV 13 , pages 184–199. Springer, 2014. [15] European Space Agency (ESA) WorldCover. Esa worldcover global land cover service. https://esa-worldcover.org/en/data-access, 2021. Accessed: 2025-12-11. [16] Yingchun Fu, Zhe Zhu, Liangyun Liu, Wenfeng Zhan, Tao He, Huanfeng Shen, Jun Zhao, Yongxue Liu, Hongsheng Zhang, Zihan Liu, et al. Remote sensing time series analysis: A review of data and applications. 

Journal of Remote Sensing , 4:0285, 2024. [17] Google Earth Engine. Copernicus_s2_cloud_probability: Sentinel -2 cloud probability. https://developers.google.com/earth-engine/datasets/catalog/ COPERNICUS_S2_CLOUD_PROBABILITY, 2025. Accessed: 2025-12-11. [18] Yutong He, Dingjie Wang, Nicholas Lai, William Zhang, Chenlin Meng, Marshall Burke, David Lobell, and Stefano Ermon. Spatial-temporal super-resolution of satellite imagery via conditional pixel synthesis. 

Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , 34:27903–27915, 2021. [19] Yutong He, William Zhang, Chenlin Meng, Marshall Burke, David B Lobell, and Stefano Ermon. Tracking urbanization in developing regions with remote sensing spatial-temporal super-resolution. arXiv preprint arXiv:2204.01736 , 2022. [20] Jonathan Ho, Chitwan Saharia, William Chan, David J Fleet, Mohammad Norouzi, and Tim Salimans. Cascaded diffusion models for high fidelity image generation. Journal of Machine Learning Research , 23(47):1–33, 2022. [21] Xudong Kang, Puhong Duan, Jier Li, and Shutao Li. Efficient swin transformer for remote sensing image super-resolution. IEEE Transactions on Image Processing , 2024. [22] Samar Khanna, Patrick Liu, Linqi Zhou, Chenlin Meng, Robin Rombach, Marshall Burke, David B. Lobell, and Stefano Ermon. Diffusionsat: A generative foundation model for satellite imagery. In The Twelfth International Conference on Learning Representations , 2024. [23] Jiwon Kim, Jung Kwon Lee, and Kyoung Mu Lee. Accurate image super-resolution using very deep convolutional networks. In Proceedings of the IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern recognition ,pages 1646–1654, 2016. [24] Kwang In Kim and Younghee Kwon. Single-image super-resolution using sparse regression and natural image prior. IEEE transactions on pattern analysis and machine intelligence , 32(6):1127–1133, 2010. [25] Thomas Köhler, Michel Bätz, Farzad Naderi, André Kaup, Andreas Maier, and Christian Riess. Toward bridging the simulated-to-real gap: Benchmarking super-resolution on real data. IEEE transactions on pattern analysis and machine intelligence , 42(11):2944–2959, 2019. [26] Pawel Kowaleczko, Tomasz Tarasiewicz, Maciej Ziaja, Daniel Kostrzewa, Jakub Nalepa, Przemyslaw Rokita, and Michal Kawulok. A real-world benchmark for sentinel-2 multi-image super-resolution. Scientific Data ,10(1):644, 2023. [27] Nico Lang, Walter Jetz, Konrad Schindler, and Jan Dirk Wegner. Ahigh-resolution canopy height model of the earth. Nature Ecology & Evolution , 7(11):1778–1789, 2023. [28] Christian Ledig, Lucas Theis, Ferenc Huszár, Jose Caballero, Andrew Cunningham, Alejandro Acosta, Andrew Aitken, Alykhan Tejani, Jo-hannes Totz, Zehan Wang, et al. Photo-realistic single image super-resolution using a generative adversarial network. In Proceedings of the IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern recognition , pages 4681–4690, 2017. [29] Sen Lei, Zhenwei Shi, and Wenjing Mo. Transformer-based multistage enhancement for remote sensing image super-resolution. IEEE Transac-tions on Geoscience and Remote Sensing , 60:1–11, 2021. [30] Bingchen Li, Xin Li, Hanxin Zhu, Yeying Jin, Ruoyu Feng, Zhizheng Zhang, and Zhibo Chen. Sed: Semantic-aware discriminator for image super-resolution. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF conference on computer vision and pattern recognition , pages 25784–25795, 2024. [31] Jian Li and David P Roy. A global analysis of sentinel-2a, sentinel-2b and landsat-8 data revisit intervals and implications for terrestrial monitoring. 

Remote Sensing , 9(9):902, 2017. [32] Yawei Li, Kai Zhang, Jingyun Liang, Jiezhang Cao, Ce Liu, Rui Gong, Yulun Zhang, Hao Tang, Yun Liu, Denis Demandolx, et al. Lsdir: A large scale dataset for image restoration. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition , pages 1775– 1787, 2023. [33] Yunfei Li, Jun Li, Lin He, Jin Chen, and Antonio Plaza. A new sensor bias-driven spatio-temporal fusion model based on convolutional neural networks. Science China Information Sciences , 63:1–16, 2020. [34] Jingyun Liang, Jiezhang Cao, Guolei Sun, Kai Zhang, Luc Van Gool, and Radu Timofte. Swinir: Image restoration using swin transformer. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF international conference on computer vision , pages 1833–1844, 2021. [35] Bee Lim, Sanghyun Son, Heewon Kim, Seungjun Nah, and Kyoung Mu Lee. Enhanced deep residual networks for single image super-resolution. In Proceedings of the IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern recognition workshops , pages 136–144, 2017. [36] Chenyang Liu, Keyan Chen, Rui Zhao, Zhengxia Zou, and Zhenwei Shi. Text2earth: Unlocking text-driven remote sensing image generation with a global-scale dataset and a foundation model. arXiv preprint arXiv:2501.00895 , 2025. [37] JG Liu. Smoothing filter-based intensity modulation: A spectral preserve image fusion technique for improving spatial details. International Journal of remote sensing , 21(18):3461–3472, 2000. [38] Xiaoyi Liu and Hao Tang. Difffno: Diffusion fourier neural operator. In 

Proceedings of the Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition Conference ,pages 150–160, 2025. [39] Ze Liu, Yutong Lin, Yue Cao, Han Hu, Yixuan Wei, Zheng Zhang, Stephen Lin, and Baining Guo. Swin transformer: Hierarchical vision transformer using shifted windows. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF international conference on computer vision , pages 10012–10022, 2021. [40] Zeping Liu, Hong Tang, Lin Feng, and Siqing Lyu. China building rooftop area: the first multi-annual (2016–2021) and high-resolution (2.5 m) building rooftop area dataset in china derived with super-resolution segmentation from sentinel-2 imagery. Earth System Science Data ,15(8):3547–3572, 2023. [41] Zhisheng Lu, Juncheng Li, Hong Liu, Chaoyan Huang, Linlin Zhang, and Tieyong Zeng. Transformer for single image super-resolution. In 

Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF conference on computer vision and pattern recognition , pages 457–466, 2022. [42] Marcus Märtens, Dario Izzo, Andrej Krzic, and Daniël Cox. Super-resolution of proba-v images using convolutional neural networks. 

Astrodynamics , 3:387–402, 2019. [43] Fanen Meng, Yijun Chen, Haoyu Jing, Laifu Zhang, Yiming Yan, Yingchao Ren, Sensen Wu, Tian Feng, Renyi Liu, and Zhenhong Du. A conditional diffusion model with fast sampling strategy for remote sensing image super-resolution. IEEE Transactions on Geoscience and Remote Sensing , 2024. [44] Meta Data for Good. Global urban areas: High-resolution population density and settlement data. https://dataforgood.facebook.com/dfg/tools/ globalurbanareas, 2023. Accessed: 2025-12-16. [45] Julien Michel, Juan Vinasco-Salinas, Jordi Inglada, and Olivier Hagolle. Sen2ven μs, a dataset for the training of sentinel-2 super-resolution algorithms. Data , 7(7):96, 2022. [46] Microsoft. USRoadDetections: U.S. Road Network Detection Dataset. https://github.com/microsoft/USRoadDetections, 2020. Accessed: 2025-12-11. [47] Numerical Terradynamic Simulation Group (NTSG). Ntsg landsat gross primary production (gpp) v2. https://developers.google.com/earth-engine/ JOURNAL OF L ATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. 14, NO. 8, AUGUST 2021 17 

datasets/catalog/UMT_NTSG_v2_LANDSAT_GPP, 2021. Accessed: 2025-12-16. [48] University of Vermont Spatial Analysis Laboratory. Landland-cov_baselc2022.tif, 2024. [49] Yunliang Qi, Meng Lou, Yimin Liu, Lu Li, Zhen Yang, and Wen Nie. Advancing image super-resolution techniques in remote sensing: A comprehensive survey. ISPRS Journal of Photogrammetry and Remote Sensing , 231:68–100, 2026. [50] Abhisek Ray, Gaurav Kumar, and Maheshkumar H Kolekar. Cfat: Un-leashing triangular windows for image super-resolution. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF conference on computer vision and pattern recognition ,pages 26120–26129, 2024. [51] Caleb Robinson, Isaac Corley, Anthony Ortiz, Rahul Dodhia, Juan M. Lavista Ferres, and Peyman Najafirad. Seeing the roads through the trees: A benchmark for modeling spatial dependencies with aerial imagery, 2024. [52] Chitwan Saharia, Jonathan Ho, William Chan, Tim Salimans, David J Fleet, and Mohammad Norouzi. Image super-resolution via iterative refinement. IEEE transactions on pattern analysis and machine intelligence , 45(4):4713–4726, 2022. [53] Shaolin Su, Josep M Rocafort, Danna Xue, David Serrano-Lozano, Lei Sun, and Javier Vazquez-Corral. Rethinking image evaluation in super-resolution. arXiv preprint arXiv:2503.13074 , 2025. [54] Zhenyu Tan, Peng Yue, Liping Di, and Junmei Tang. Deriving high spatiotemporal remote sensing images using deep convolutional network. 

Remote Sensing , 10(7):1066, 2018. [55] Bing Maps Team. Computer generated building footprints for the united states, 2018. [56] U.S. Geological Survey. Landsat dynamic surface water extent (dswe) science products. https://www.usgs.gov/landsat-missions/ landsat-dynamic-surface-water-extent-science-products, 2022. Accessed: 2025-12-16. [57] USDA Farm Service Agency Aerial Photography Field Office. Naip seam lines by state. https://gdg.sc.egov.usda.gov/Catalog/ProductDescription/ NAIPSL.html, 2022. Accessed: 2025-12-11. [58] USDA National Agricultural Statistics Service. Cropland data layer. https://nassgeodata.gmu.edu/CropScape/, 2021. Published crop-specific data layer. Accessed: 12/16/2025. [59] Vlad Vasilescu, Mihai Datcu, and Daniela Faur. A cnn-based sentinel-2 image super-resolution method using multiobjective training. IEEE Transactions on Geoscience and Remote Sensing , 61:1–14, 2023. [60] Jia Wang, Liuyu Xiang, Lei Liu, Jiaochong Xu, Peipei Li, Qizhi Xu, and Zhaofeng He. Towards real-world remote sensing image super-resolution: A new benchmark and an efficient model. IEEE Transactions on Geoscience and Remote Sensing , 2024. [61] Qunming Wang, Yijie Tang, Xiaohua Tong, and Peter M Atkinson. Virtual image pair-based spatio-temporal fusion. Remote Sensing of Environment ,249:112009, 2020. [62] Xintao Wang, Liangbin Xie, Chao Dong, and Ying Shan. Real-esrgan: Training real-world blind super-resolution with pure synthetic data. In 

Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF international conference on computer vision , pages 1905–1914, 2021. [63] Xintao Wang, Ke Yu, Shixiang Wu, Jinjin Gu, Yihao Liu, Chao Dong, Yu Qiao, and Chen Change Loy. Esrgan: Enhanced super-resolution generative adversarial networks. In Proceedings of the European conference on computer vision (ECCV) workshops , pages 0–0, 2018. [64] Yan Wang, Yi Liu, Shijie Zhao, Junlin Li, and Li Zhang. Camixersr: Only details need more" attention". In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition , pages 25837– 25846, 2024. [65] Zhihao Wang, Cooper Li, Ruichen Wang, Lei Ma, George Hurtt, Xiaowei Jia, Gengchen Mai, Zhili Li, and Yiqun Xie. Treefinder: A us-scale benchmark dataset for individual tree mortality monitoring using high-resolution aerial imagery. In The Thirty-ninth Annual Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems Datasets and Benchmarks Track .[66] Zhou Wang, Alan C Bovik, Hamid R Sheikh, and Eero P Simoncelli. Image quality assessment: from error visibility to structural similarity. 

IEEE transactions on image processing , 13(4):600–612, 2004. [67] Min Wei and Xuesong Zhang. Super-resolution neural operator. In 

Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition , pages 18247–18256, 2023. [68] Piper Wolters, Favyen Bastani, and Aniruddha Kembhavi. Zooming out on zooming in: Advancing super-resolution for remote sensing. arXiv preprint arXiv:2311.18082 , 2023. [69] WWF HydroSHEDS. Free-flowing rivers - wwf hydrosheds v1. https://developers.google.com/earth-engine/datasets/catalog/WWF_ HydroSHEDS_v1_FreeFlowingRivers, 2000. Accessed: 2025-12-16. [70] Yi Xiao, Qiangqiang Yuan, Kui Jiang, Jiang He, Xianyu Jin, and Liangpei Zhang. Ediffsr: An efficient diffusion probabilistic model for remote sensing image super-resolution. IEEE Transactions on Geoscience and Remote Sensing , 62:1–14, 2023. [71] Enze Xie, Wenhai Wang, Zhiding Yu, Anima Anandkumar, Jose M Alvarez, and Ping Luo. Segformer: Simple and efficient design for semantic segmentation with transformers. Advances in neural information processing systems , 34:12077–12090, 2021. [72] Zihao Xu, Yuzhi Tang, Bowen Xu, and Qingquan Li. Neurop-diff: Continuous remote sensing image super-resolution via neural operator diffusion. arXiv preprint arXiv:2501.09054 , 2025. [73] Fuzhi Yang, Huan Yang, Jianlong Fu, Hongtao Lu, and Baining Guo. Learning texture transformer network for image super-resolution. In 

Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF conference on computer vision and pattern recognition , pages 5791–5800, 2020. [74] Roman Zeyde, Michael Elad, and Matan Protter. On single image scale-up using sparse-representations. In International conference on curves and surfaces , pages 711–730. Springer, 2010. [75] Leheng Zhang, Yawei Li, Xingyu Zhou, Xiaorui Zhao, and Shuhang Gu. Transcending the limit of local window: Advanced super-resolution transformer with adaptive token dictionary. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF conference on computer vision and pattern recognition , pages 2856–2865, 2024. [76] Leheng Zhang, Weiyi You, Kexuan Shi, and Shuhang Gu. Uncertainty-guided perturbation for image super-resolution diffusion model. In 

Proceedings of the Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition Conference ,pages 17980–17989, 2025. [77] Lvmin Zhang, Anyi Rao, and Maneesh Agrawala. Adding conditional control to text-to-image diffusion models. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF international conference on computer vision , pages 3836– 3847, 2023. [78] Richard Zhang, Phillip Isola, Alexei A Efros, Eli Shechtman, and Oliver Wang. The unreasonable effectiveness of deep features as a perceptual metric. In Proceedings of the IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern recognition , pages 586–595, 2018. [79] Yulun Zhang, Kunpeng Li, Kai Li, Lichen Wang, Bineng Zhong, and Yun Fu. Image super-resolution using very deep residual channel attention networks. In Proceedings of the European conference on computer vision (ECCV) , pages 286–301, 2018. [80] Yunfeng Zhang, Qinglan Fan, Fangxun Bao, Yifang Liu, and Caiming Zhang. Single-image super-resolution based on rational fractal inter-polation. IEEE Transactions on Image Processing , 27(8):3782–3797, 2018. [81] Hui-Jia Zhao, Xiao-Ping Lu, and Kai-Chang Di. Arbitrary-scale planetary remote sensing super-resolution via adaptive frequency–spatial neural operator. Remote Sensing , 17(22):3718, 2025. [82] Zhebin Zhao, Wu Chen, San Jiang, Yaxin Li, and Jingxian Wang. Narrow road extraction from high-resolution remote sensing images: Swge-net and msif-net. Geo-spatial Information Science , pages 1–18, 2024. [83] Fei Zhou, Wenming Yang, and Qingmin Liao. Interpolation-based image super-resolution using multisurface fitting. IEEE Transactions on Image Processing , 21(7):3312–3318, 2012. [84] Huanyu Zhou, Qingjie Liu, and Yunhong Wang. Panformer: A transformer based model for pan-sharpening. In 2022 IEEE International Conference on Multimedia and Expo (ICME) , pages 1–6. IEEE, 2022. [85] Man Zhou, Keyu Yan, Jie Huang, Zihe Yang, Xueyang Fu, and Feng Zhao. Mutual information-driven pan-sharpening. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition ,pages 1798–1808, 2022.