Title: Benchmarking and Enhancing Text-to-Image Models for Generating Visual Representations in Early Arithmetic Education

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2605.31212v1

Published Time: Mon, 01 Jun 2026 01:40:59 GMT

Number of Pages: 26

Markdown Content:
# Benchmarking and Enhancing Text-to-Image Models for Generating Visual Representations in Early Arithmetic Education 

Junling Wang 1,2 Boqi Chen 1,2 Heejin Do 1,2

Mubashara Akhtar 1,2 April Yi Wang 1 Mrinmaya Sachan 11Department of Computer Science, ETH Zurich  

> 2

ETH AI Center 

Abstract 

AI systems are increasingly used to support educational content creation, yet it remains un-clear whether they can generate outputs that faithfully represent the pedagogical concepts they are intended to teach. Thus, we intro-duce equation-to-visual generation, a task that, in contrast to conventional image generation, requires producing pedagogically meaningful visuals from arithmetic equations while pre-cisely preserving their numerical and relational structure. Informed by interviews with teach-ers and an analysis of educational materials, we construct E2V-Bench, a benchmark span-ning four pedagogically grounded visual types, along with automatic metrics for evaluating vi-sual correctness. Our evaluation reveals that recent text-to-image (T2I) models frequently fail on this task, with errors dominated by incor-rect object counts and broken relational struc-ture. Building on this, we explore benchmark-guided enhancement strategies. These strate-gies improve representative models, while the remaining gap calls for stronger numerical and relational grounding in future T2I models. 

1 Introduction 

Visuals are key pedagogical tools for teaching arith-metic concepts in early primary education. Visuals help learners transform abstract mathematical sym-bols into intuitive representations (Cooper et al., 2018), supporting deeper understanding and prob-lem solving skills (Mayer, 2002). For instance, to understand “7 + 2 = 9”, learners may benefit from a visual showing seven objects together with two more to make nine (Mayer, 2002). With the rise of multimodal tutoring systems and AI-augmented open educational resources, creat-ing such visuals has become increasingly important, as these systems seek to provide learning materi-als tailored to individual learners and adapted to specific questions, solution steps, misconceptions, Target:                

> 6red + 7blue balloons
> (a) Spatial -based (b) Color -based
> (c) Container -based (d) Object -based
> Missing one red
> Target:
> 6left + 7right stars
> Eight stars!
> Too many in the box! Only 1 ball!
> Target:
> 6outside + 7in box
> Target:
> 6balls + 7dolls

Equation: 6 + 7 = 13 

Figure 1: Failure cases of text-to-image models. All images are generated from the equation “6 + 7 = 13” using four visual types (e.g., spatial-based; see Sec. 3). 

and backgrounds, rather than used as fixed illustra-tions (Singh et al., 2023; Lee et al., 2025). How-ever, manual visual creation is time-consuming and cannot support the immediate, adaptive scaffolding required in such contexts (Xu et al., 2021; Kaitera and Harmoinen, 2022; Boonen et al., 2016). This motivates automatic approaches for produc-ing pedagogically aligned visuals on demand, with recent work beginning to explore visual generation and retrieval. Math2Visual (Wang et al., 2025) gen-erates visuals from word problems, but relies on fixed icon sets and predefined templates, limiting its flexibility. Related works have also explored text-image matching for visual retrieval in textbook creation (Singh et al., 2023) and text-driven visual question generation (Singh et al., 2019; Luo et al., 2024); however, these methods focus on retrieval or question construction rather than generating ed-ucational visuals. In this work, we focus on primary school level (Grades 1-3) arithmetic education, which deals 

> arXiv:2605.31212v1 [cs.CV] 29 May 2026

with teaching basic operations. We formalize the task of equation-to-visual ( E2V ) generation and in-troduce E2V-Bench , a novel benchmark for gener-ating pedagogically meaningful images from arith-metic equations, together with automatic evalua-tion metrics for assessing the quality of generated visuals. To ground our benchmark design in in-structional practice, we manually analyzed educa-tional visuals from six educational resources and identified four recurring visual types. We further in-terviewed ten primary-school mathematics teachers to refine and validate these design choices. Using E2V-Bench , we evaluate nine representa-tive Text-to-Image ( T2I ) models across five model families. While several models show non-trivial performance, as shown in Fig. 1, even the strongest models exhibit systematic failures in generating pedagogically faithful visuals. In contrast, a struc-tured DSL-based reference method achieves near-perfect accuracy, suggesting that while the task is well specified within our benchmark scope, current T2I models still struggle to produce pedagogically faithful visual representations. Motivated by these findings, we explore benchmark-guided enhance-ment strategies, including prompt refinement, re-generation, and rejection-sampling supervised fine-tuning with curated training data. Our results show that these strategies yield notable improvements for representative models, highlighting directions for making visual generation more reliable in educa-tional settings. Our contributions are: 1 E2V-Bench , the first benchmark dedicated to equation-to-visual generation in early arithmetic education, grounded in educational resources and teacher feedback. 2 A systematic evaluation of representative T2I models showing that models struggle to generate pedagogically faithful visuals for equations. 3 A high-quality E2V training dataset and benchmark-guided enhancement strategies that im-prove representative models on E2V generation. 

2 Related Work 

Visuals in Teaching Primary-School Arithmetic 

Visuals are widely recognized as beneficial for learning arithmetic skills (Kaitera and Harmoinen, 2022; Boonen et al., 2016). Well-designed visuals make mathematical ideas more accessible (Mayer, 2002; Evagorou et al., 2015; Small and Lin, 2025), foster student engagement (Cooper et al., 2018), and support more efficient learning (Arcavi, 2003). Various pedagogical designs have been pro-posed to teach arithmetic. For instance, the bar model (Hoven and Garelick, 2007) expresses nu-merical relations through proportional bars, and has been shown to enhance children’s problem-solving ability (Osman et al., 2018) and use of effective cognitive strategies (Morin et al., 2017). The Noyon framework depicts mathematical prob-lems with modular iconic components, offering a flexible yet structured approach to visualize math-ematical reasoning (Saquib et al., 2021). These approaches underscore the importance of carefully designed visuals in arithmetic education. 

Pedagogical Visual Retrieval and Generation 

Despite their benefits, producing educational visu-als requires considerable effort from teachers (Xu et al., 2021), motivating automation of visual re-trieval and generation. Prior work has explored image retrieval for textbook development (Singh et al., 2023), generating multiple-choice questions from semantic representations (Singh et al., 2019), and combining multimodal information for ques-tion generation (Luo et al., 2024). However, these methods do not focus on visualizing mathematical concepts for learning. Early efforts such as Visual-Math (Dwivedi et al., 2017) rendered simple word problems with pre-existing images, but addressed only basic operations (+, -) and lacked pedagogi-cal validation. More recently, Math2Visual (Wang et al., 2025) generates visuals from math word prob-lems with stronger educational grounding, but its reliance on fixed templates limits flexibility in rep-resenting arithmetic concepts. These works high-light progress toward automation but underscore the absence of evaluations and methods for tuning models to generate educational visuals. 

3 Equation-to-Visual Generation Task 

We define the task of E2V generation as produc-ing visuals that faithfully represent the arithmetic concepts encoded in an equation. Rather than repro-ducing equations as text, generated visuals should depict quantities through concrete objects and spa-tial arrangements that support learners’ intuitive understanding of arithmetic relationships: a form of visual scaffolding commonly used in early math-ematics instruction (Kaitera and Harmoinen, 2022; Boonen et al., 2016). To ground this task in authentic educational prac-tice, we began by examining how arithmetic equa-tions are visualized in existing instructional materi-als. Two researchers manually collected 189 visu-als from six widely used educational resources, in-cluding three textbooks and three online platforms (full list in App. A). After excluding seven decora-tive visuals that did not correspond to arithmetic equations, we conducted a two-stage thematic anal-ysis on the remaining 182 visuals: an exploratory review of 50 visuals to identify recurring patterns, followed by coding the remaining 132 visuals us-ing the identified categories (details are in App. A). This analysis revealed four recurring visual types for representing arithmetic equations: 

(1) Color-based: Operands are distinguished by assigning distinct colors to otherwise identical ob-jects (e.g., red vs. green apples). Color serves as the primary grouping cue, a perceptual feature that chil-dren readily use for grouping (Harris et al., 1970). 

(2) Object-based: Operands are distinguished by using different object types, with object category serving as the primary grouping cue. Prior work shows that children can readily organize objects by type (Bornstein and Arterberry, 2010). 

(3) Spatial-based: Operands are distinguished by placing object groups in different spatial positions (e.g., left vs. right). Spatial separation serves as the primary grouping cue, which children naturally use to organize visual information (Quinn et al., 2008). 

(4) Container-based: Operands are distinguished by containment relations, such as placing one group inside a container and another outside, or placing groups into different containers. Children can rea-son about containment (Casasola et al., 2003), mak-ing containers natural for grouping. Based on this analysis, we define the E2V task as generating accurate visuals for an equation under a specified visual type. The equation determines the quantities and arithmetic relation, while the visual type determines how operands are visually grouped. We formalize each equation–visual type pair with a domain-specific language (DSL), 

t{gi{item , count , a t}} ni=1 ,

where t denotes the visual type, gi an operand group, item /count the object category and quan-tity within the group, and at the grouping at-tribute, such as color , position , or container .For object-based visuals, the object category itself serves as the grouping cue, so no additional group-ing attribute is required. This DSL serves as the reference semantics for generation and evaluation; details and examples are in App. F.1. We also ob-served that educational visuals commonly appear in both cartoon and realistic styles, which may in-fluence how learners perceive generated content. Although our task formulation supports both styles, we focus the main analysis on realistic-style visuals and report cartoon-style results in App. C.10. 

3.1 Evaluative Study with Teachers 

To assess the pedagogical value of the proposed visual types, we conducted an evaluative study with ten experienced primary school math teachers (Grades 1-3; demographics in Tab. 11). Teachers reviewed visuals following our four visual types, covering both cartoon and realistic style designs across the four basic arithmetic operations, and rated their pedagogical usefulness on a 7-point Lik-ert scale. Study details are provided in App. D. 

The four visual types align with current class-room practice. Teachers consistently reported that the four visual types reflect visuals commonly used in Grade 1-3 classrooms (Tab. 16). All participants indicated prior experience with similar visuals, sug-gesting that our designs align well with existing instructional practices. Across evaluation criteria, teachers gave uniformly high ratings to visuals gen-erated using the proposed visual types (Tab. 12), indicating teachers find visuals following our pro-posed visual types pedagogically valuable and ef-fective for supporting arithmetic learning. 

Visual type preferences. Teachers’ preferences for visual types varied by operation (Tab. 15). Container-based visuals were favored for multipli-cation and division because explicit grouping helps convey the underlying operations. Color-based vi-suals were commonly linked to addition, where color cues distinguish addends while showing their combination. Spatial-based visuals were often con-sidered useful for subtraction, as spatial separation supports the idea of removing quantities, and also for grouping in multiplication and division. Object-based visuals were viewed as more cognitively de-manding and better suited for students who already have a basic understanding of the operations. 

4 E2V-Bench: Dataset and Metrics 

Although the broader E2V goal is defined over equations, directly prompting existing T2I models with symbolic expressions is ineffective, as models tend to generate stylized renderings of equations rather than object-based visuals that convey quan-tity and structure (App. C.1). This limitation arises because current T2I models are designed for nat-Category Model Quantity Acc. Overall Acc.                                                                                              

> DSL-based DSL-based (ours) 98 .3±1.498 .3±1.4
> Prompt Refinement PAE 1.0±1.11.0±1.1
> Closed-source Recraft-v3 6.0±2.74.7±2.4
> GPT-Image-1 27 .0±5.021 .3±4.6
> Diffusion-based SD-3.5-large 6.7±2.93.3±2.1
> Flux.1-dev 8.7±3.26.3±2.8
> Flux.1-dev (SFT) 8.0±3.15.3±2.6
> Layout-to-image Blueprint 2.7±1.81.3±1.3
> LMD 22 .4±4.812 .0±3.7
> LMD (PR) 26 .7±5.114 .7±4.1
> LMD (PR+Regen) 26 .7±5.015 .3±4.1
> Transformer-based Show-o2 4.3±2.32.3±1.7
> Bagel 8.0±3.15.7±2.6
> Bagel (SFT) 8.0±3.16.3±2.8
> Bagel (RSFT) 16 .7±4.314 .7±4.0

Table 1: Evaluation of T2I models and enhanced variants on E2V-Bench. We report quantity and overall accuracy with 95% confidence interval half-widths. PR denotes prompt refinement, Regen denotes regeneration. SD-3.5-large denotes Stable Diffusion-3.5-large. 

ural language inputs rather than symbolic expres-sions. To address this gap, E2V-Bench standard-izes the intermediate equation-to-visual-description step: each equation is verbalized into a visual de-scription ( VD ) that specifies the intended quanti-ties, objects, and grouping cue, and models are evaluated on whether they can faithfully render this VD. This formulation evaluates image generation under a standardized equation-to- VD layer, isolat-ing it from open-ended verbalization while still reflecting a practical equation-to-visual pipeline. 

4.1 Benchmark Construction 

We construct Equation-to-Visual Benchmark (E2V-Bench ) in two phases: equation generation and VD generation (Fig. 2). We enumerate arith-metic equations over the four basic operations (+, –, ×, ÷), restricting quantities to at most 20 for primary-school suitability, yielding 371 unique equations. Using in-context learning with Gemini-2.5-Flash (Google, 2025), we generate four VD sper equation, one for each visual type, guided by eight manually crafted examples per type; we fur-ther use Gemini-2.5-Flash to annotate each VD with its corresponding DSL for evaluation. Two researchers verified 120 sampled VD –DSL pairs (30 per visual type), confirming alignment with the intended equations and visual types. Peda-gogical value was further validated by ten primary-school teachers, who evaluated 32 generated VD sand rated them as suitable for classroom use (App. D.3). The dataset contains 1,484 VD s: 1,184 LLM 6 + 7 = 13             

> There are six red balloons and seven blue balloons.
> Color-based Object-based
> Spatial-based
> Container-based
> There are six balls and seven dolls.
> There are six stars on the left and seven stars on the right.
> Six crayons are inside the box while
> seven are out of the box.
> Equation

Figure 2: Standardized equation-to-VD layer used in E2V-Bench. For each equation, we use an LLM to generate four VDs, one for each visual type. These VDs are used as prompts for T2I models to produce visuals. 

for training and 300 for testing (statistics in Tab. 4), evenly balanced across the four visual types. 

4.2 Evaluation Metrics 

We evaluate model outputs using two criteria in-formed by prior work and interviews with ten primary-school mathematics teachers. Both cri-teria compare each generated visual against the DSL induced by its equation and visual type. 

Quantity Accuracy measures whether the number of visual instances in each operand group matches the count specified by the DSL . A visual is consid-ered quantity accurate only if all operand groups have correct counts. To compute this automatically, we adapt CountGD (Amini-Naieni et al., 2024), which detects instances of each target object type in the visual and returns their total count. 

Overall Accuracy measures whether a visual cor-rectly satisfies all semantic and structural con-straints induced by the DSL . While recent bench-marks often rely on vision-language models as judges, we intentionally avoid this approach due to their unreliability in object counting and visual verification (Choudhury et al., 2025). To ensure precise and reproducible evaluation, we adopt a de-terministic evaluation pipeline implemented with OpenCV and Scikit-Learn. For each generated im-age, we first detect object instances using CountGD, then apply verification rules conditioned on the vi-sual type. For example, in color-based visuals, our method checks whether the detected object colors align with the expected color distribution defined by the corresponding semantic representation. Im-plementation details are in App. C.2. Both criteria are critical in educational settings, where learning depends on the correctness of instructional information (Metzger et al., 2003; Goldin and Shteingold, 2001). To validate align-ment with human judgment, we randomly sampled 216 visuals generated by the nine models from the E2V-Bench test set and had two researchers inde-pendently annotate each visual. They disagreed on only two cases, resolved through discussion. Co-hen’s κ between human annotations and automatic metrics was 0.96 for both criteria, indicating strong agreement; agreement rates by quantity range and visual type are reported in App. C.2.3. To further assess pedagogical validity, we collected expert feedback from ten primary-school teachers during the user study; all teachers agreed that the two cri-teria adequately capture visual quality for teaching arithmetic skills (details in App. D). 

5 Benchmarking T2I Models 

We evaluate nine T2I models on E2V-Bench, cov-ering five representative model families: closed-source models (GPT-Image-1, Recraft-v3), which are proprietary general-purpose image generation systems; diffusion-based models (Flux.1-dev, Sta-ble Diffusion-3.5-large), which synthesize images through iterative denoising; layout-to-image mod-els (LMD, Blueprint), which first generate text-based bounding box layouts and then condition a diffusion model on them; transformer-based models (Show-o2, Bagel), which integrate multi-modal understanding and generation within a single transformer architecture; and a prompt-refinement model (PAE), which iteratively rewrites prompts for T2I models. Model references are provided in Tab. 10. We additionally include a DSL -based method inspired by Math2Visual (Wang et al., 2025), which renders visuals from the DSL using icon assets. Given a DSL specification, the ren-derer selects icons according to the object category, places them according to the visual type and group-ing attributes, and recolors icons for color-based visuals. Because it relies on manually specified ren-dering rules and directly receives the target speci-fication, we treat it as a reference rather than as a comparable T2I baseline; details are in App. F.2. 

Performance Across Model Families. Tab. 1 re-ports the evaluation results with 95% confidence interval half-widths estimated from 10,000 boot-strap resamples. Among the nine T2I models, GPT-Image-1 achieves the best performance, while the other closed-source model, Recraft-v3, per-forms substantially worse. Open-source models exhibit substantial variation across model families. 1-5 6-10 11-15 16-20 Quantity range 010 20 30 40 50 Overall accuracy (%)  GPT-Image-1 Bagel Bagel (RSFT) LMD LMD (PR + Regen) Flux.1-dev Flux.1-dev (SFT) 

Figure 3: Overall accuracy across quantity ranges. 

Model performance generally declines as object counts increase, highlighting quantity control as a major chal-lenge in E2V generation. 

Diffusion-based models perform poorly overall: Stable Diffusion-3.5-large achieves low overall ac-curacy, while Flux.1-dev shows modest improve-ments but still struggles to reliably control object counts. Layout-to-image models show mixed per-formance. Blueprint performs worst across most metrics, whereas LMD substantially outperforms other open-source models, suggesting that explicit layout conditioning benefits numerical grounding. Transformer-based models exhibit variable behav-ior: Bagel surpasses Show-o2 in both quantity and overall accuracy. Finally, PAE records near-zero overall accuracy, confirming that prompt refine-ment alone is ineffective at generating images with correct object counts, consistent with prior find-ings (Cao et al., 2025b). The DSL -based method reaches 98.3% overall accuracy, suggesting that E2V is largely solvable with explicit structure, while current T2I models still struggle on this task. We therefore further analyze the sources of this gap in T2I models, focusing on how performance varies across quantity ranges and visual types. 

Variation Across Quantities and Visual Types. 

Across models, overall accuracy declines sharply as object counts increase (Figure 3). The steep-est drop occurs when moving from 1–5 objects to 6–10 objects, with several stronger models falling from around 50% to roughly 20–25%. To better understand this drop, we conducted an error anal-ysis on 208 randomly sampled visuals from four representative models. Error cases were manually coded into quantity error (90.4%), structural er-ror (16.8%), object mismatch (11.1%), and other failures (2.9%), with each sample allowed to re-ceive multiple error labels. These results suggest that the performance drop is driven primarily by quantity errors; details are provided in App. C.13. Container Object Color Spatial                      

> Visual type
> GPT-Image-1 Bagel Bagel (RSFT) LMD LMD (PR + Regen) Flux.1-dev Flux.1-dev (SFT)
> 423 32 27 3875820 16 15 324 417 527 821 04516 3838
> 0510 15 20 25 30
> Accuracy (%)

Figure 4: Overall accuracy across visual types. Perfor-mance varies by visual type, showing that grouping cues introduce different levels of difficulty for T2I models. 

Performance also varies by visual type (Fig. 4): GPT-Image-1 shows the most balanced profile, par-ticularly outperforming other models in the color visual type. LMD performs comparably to GPT-Image-1 in the object, spatial, and container visual types. Bagel emerges as the second-best performer on container and color-based visuals, indicating its potential for further improvement. The LMD (PR+Regen), Bagel (RSFT) and Flux.1-dev (SFT) are enhanced versions of LMD, Bagel and Flux.1-dev; we will discuss these in Sec. 6. 

Key Insights and Open-source Potential. Over-all, GPT-Image-1 delivers the highest-quality out-puts but cannot serve as a reproducible research baseline due to its proprietary nature. Among open-source models, LMD, Flux.1-dev, and Bagel stand out as the strongest representatives and demonstrate potential for further improvement. 

6 Enhancing E2V Generation 

Motivated by our error analysis (Sec. 5), which identified quantity errors as the dominant failure mode and structural issues as a secondary source of errors, we use E2V-Bench to explore diagnostic, benchmark-guided strategies for improving repre-sentative T2I models: LMD, Bagel, and Flux.1-dev. 

6.1 Layout-to-Image Model 

LMD 1 is a representative layout-to-image frame-work. To understand why it underperforms on E2V-Bench, we analyzed the layouts produced by LMD. Two researchers conducted a thematic analysis of 50 generated layouts. The analysis proceeded in 

> 1All LMD experiments use GPT-4o for layout generation, the state-of-the-art multimodal model at the time (Cao et al., 2025a; Ramachandran et al., 2025).

two phases: an initial exploration of 20 layouts to identify recurring error types, followed by a systematic evaluation of the remaining 30 layouts using these categories. The two researchers ini-tially disagreed on four cases, which were resolved through discussion, resulting in three common er-ror types: (1) Quantity error: the number of gen-erated objects does not match the input VD ; (2) Boundary error: bounding boxes extend beyond the image boundary; and (3) Format error: invalid JSON output that cannot be parsed. Grounded in these findings, we developed rule-based scripts to automatically detect each error type. Tab. 2 reports the frequencies of these errors across 300 samples from the E2V-Bench test set. These results suggest that many of LMD’s failures arise during layout generation, before final image synthesis. Based on this analysis, we explore the following two strate-gies to improve layout generation: 

Prompt refinement. Motivated by our analysis showing that many failures originate during layout generation, we refine the prompt to better guide scene-level planning before box prediction. Rather than asking the model to directly output bounding boxes, the revised prompt frames layout generation as a scene design task: the model is first asked to plan a coherent scene that can accommodate all required objects, and then to generate bounding boxes consistent with that scene. Concretely, the prompt instructs the model to use a plausible set-ting, keep all target objects clearly visible and suffi-ciently large, place boxes within image boundaries, avoid unnecessary overlap, and organize objects in spatially meaningful ways that support counting and grouping. It also encourages simple configura-tions, such as grouping related objects and adopting top-down views in crowded scenes, to reduce am-biguity in the final layout. In addition, we provide 15 manually curated in-context examples for E2V that demonstrate layouts satisfying these spatial and pedagogical constraints. Original and refined prompts are provided in App. C.6. 

Regeneration. We further introduce an auto-matic regeneration loop that uses rule-based error detectors derived from layout error analysis. These detectors check whether the generated layout con-tains the correct number of objects (quantity error), whether any bounding boxes extend beyond the image boundary (boundary error), and whether the output follows the required JSON format (format error). After an initial layout is generated, we apply Method Quant Err. (%) Bound Err. (%) Format Err. (%)          

> LMD 41.7 18.7 2.0 LMD (PR) 27.0 22.3 0.0
> LMD (PR+Regen) 21.0 6.7 0.0

Table 2: Layout-generation error rates for LMD vari-ants. Prompt refinement and regeneration reduce quan-tity, boundary, and format errors, suggesting that many downstream failures originate from layout planning. 

these detectors to identify potential errors. If any error is found, we construct a targeted feedback prompt that explicitly describes the detected issue (e.g., “the previously generated layout contains an incorrect number of objects”) and provide the pre-vious layout as context to guide correction. To limit computation and avoid over-correction, we allow up to two regeneration attempts per layout. 

Results. Prompt refinement and regeneration lead to reductions across all layout error types, as detected by our scripts, and yield corresponding im-provements in downstream visual accuracy. Tab. 2 shows that prompt refinement notably reduces lay-out errors, with further gains from regeneration. These improvements translate into better end-task performance on the E2V-Bench test set (Tab. 1), where overall accuracy increases from 12.0% to 15.3% with prompt refinement and regeneration. 

6.2 Diffusion and Transformer-based Models 

Next, we explore whether supervised fine-tuning on a curated dataset can improve T2I models, including a diffusion model (Flux.1-dev) and a transformer-based model (Bagel). 

Training Dataset Construction. We curate train-ing data with a generation-and-filtering pipeline: generating 5,920 VD s from the E2V-Bench train-ing equations and using GPT-Image-1, the best-performing model in our benchmark, to generate corresponding visuals. We then filter the generated images using our automatic metrics (see Sec. 4.2) and retain those with no errors (overall accuracy of one), resulting in 1,055 image– VD pairs (Tab. 5). We fine-tuned both Flux.1-dev and Bagel for 10k steps (details are in App. C.7 and C.8). 

Results. Tab. 1 reveals divergent trends: fine-tuning slightly improves the overall accuracy of Bagel from 5.7% to 6.3%, but degrades the over-all accuracy of Flux.1-dev. We hypothesize that Bagel, an LLM-initialized unified multimodal model trained on interleaved data, retains stronger numerical reasoning capabilities than Flux’s purely Gemini-2.5-Flash 

> Data Source 1
> Equations
> GPT-Image-1
> Visual Descriptions
> Initial Visuals
> Filtered Visuals
> Overall Accuracy Filter
> Model Training
> SFT
> RSFT
> No
> Accuracy > Previous Best
> Enhanced Bagel Model
> Data Source 2
> Equations
> Bagel Style Conversion
> Template-based Visuals
> Synthetic Visuals
> Filtered Visuals
> Overall Accuracy Filter
> Yes

Figure 5: Bagel training pipeline. The training process begins with SFT on filtered GPT-Image-1 generated data, continues with SFT on a mixed dataset of synthetic data and GPT-Image-1 data, and concludes with iterative rejection-sampling supervised fine-tuning. 

generative diffusion architecture, making it more robust for further enhancement. This is consistent with prior findings on the limitations of diffusion models in numerical reasoning (Kajic et al., 2024). 

6.2.1 Further Enhancements to Bagel 

We further improve Bagel’s performance with synthetic augmentation and iterative refinement (Fig. 5). We constructed a synthetic dataset using template-based scripts and icon assets, with equa-tions drawn from the E2V-Bench training split. As the synthetic images differ from Bagel-generated outputs in their pixel-level distribution, we adapted them using Bagel’s style transfer module and ap-plied metric-based filtering to retain higher-quality 3,017 examples (details in App. C.5). Following prior work (Adarsh et al., 2025), we mixed the fil-tered synthetic data with the original training set and performed SFT from the previously fine-tuned checkpoint. We adopt this strategy because mixing GPT and synthetic data in the initial fine-tuning stage led to lower performance (App. C.9), likely because the GPT-Image-1 data provides a stronger initial generation prior. As shown in Fig. 6, the sec-ond SFT stage further improves overall accuracy. We further applied rejection-sampling super-vised fine-tuning (RSFT), generating ten candi-date outputs per training VD and retaining sam-ples judged correct by overall accuracy, with at most three visuals preserved per VD to avoid over-representing easy cases (see Fig. 5). Each RSFT round was trained for 10k steps, and training was stopped once performance no longer improved. As shown in Fig. 6, RSFT improves overall accuracy to 14.7%. Further RSFT iterations do not yield additional improvement, potentially due to reduced sample diversity and increased focus on easy cases. Bagel Bagel SFT (Iter 1) Bagel SFT (Iter 2) Bagel RSFT (Iter 3) Bagel RSFT (Iter 4) Bagel RSFT (Iter 5) 5.0 7.5 10.0 12.5 15.0 17.5 20.0 22.5 Accuracy (%)    

> 5.7% 6.3% 10.3% 12.7% 14.7% 8.0% 8.0% 15.3% 15.0% 16.7% 19.7%
> Overall Accuracy Quantity Accuracy
> 14.7%

Figure 6: Bagel performance across training stages. 

Overall accuracy improves after synthetic augmentation and RSFT, showing gains from structured data curation. Star indicates the best-performing checkpoint. 

To verify that the gains were not simply due to additional training and did not merely reflect closer alignment to the automatic evaluation met-ric, we conducted two additional analyses, with component-level ablations reported in App. C.9. Fine-tuning Bagel on the original training data alone for 20k, 30k, and 40k steps yielded overall accuracies of 5.7%, 6.3%, and 7.7%, respectively, indicating that increased training alone does not ex-plain the improvement. We further randomly sam-pled 300 visuals from GPT-Image-1, Bagel (RSFT), and LMD (PR+Regen), and two researchers inde-pendently annotated them for Overall Accuracy and Quantity Accuracy. They disagreed on three cases, which were resolved through discussion. The au-tomatic judgments showed high agreement with human labels, with exact agreement rates of 0.98 and 0.94 and Cohen’s kappa values of 0.92 and 0.82 for Overall Accuracy and Quantity Accuracy, respectively, suggesting that the gains reflect im-proved arithmetic reasoning and visual grounding rather than overfitting to the evaluation metric. 

6.3 Analysis and Real-World Validation 

Fig. 3 and Fig. 4 summarize model performance after enhancements. In Fig. 3, Bagel (RSFT) achieves accuracy similar to GPT-Image-1 in the low-quantity range, but its performance declines rapidly as object counts increase. In contrast, LMD (PR+Regen) attains lower accuracy in low-quantity settings but exhibits more stable performance as quantities grow, suggesting that layout priors help maintain robustness under higher object counts. Across all visual types (Fig. 4), Bagel (RSFT) improves over the original Bagel, performing best on container-based and second best on color-based visuals. LMD (PR+Regen) improves across all vi-sual types, performing best on object-based and second-best on spatial-based visuals, indicating GPT-Image-1 LMD (PR+Regen) Bagel (RSFT) 

> 10
> 20
> 30 Accuracy (%)
> 21.3% 27.5% 15.3% 20.3% 14.7% 19.2%
> E2V-Bench (Overall Acc.) Real-World (Overall Acc.) E2V-Bench (Quantity Acc.) Real-World (Quantity Acc.)

Figure 7: Human evaluation on the real-world edu-cational visuals and E2V-Bench . Performance trends on real-world dataset mirror those on E2V-Bench , sug-gesting that the E2V-Bench captures core pedagogical challenges present in authentic educational visuals. 

that layout-based priors are effective for generating correct objects and precise spatial arrangements. To validate model performance in authentic edu-cational settings, we conducted a human evaluation on a manually curated dataset of real-world edu-cational visuals paired with VD s, collected from textbooks and online educational platforms (§3). The resulting dataset covers the four basic oper-ations and comprises 182 visuals. Using these VD s as prompts, we evaluated three representa-tive models: GPT-Image-1, LMD (PR+Regen), and Bagel (RSFT), by generating 546 visuals. Two re-searchers independently compared each generated visual against the ground-truth visual and assigned binary judgments for Quantity and Overall Accu-racy using the criteria defined in Sec. 4.2, resolv-ing three initial disagreements through discussion (details in App. C.11). As shown in Fig. 7, per-formance trends on this real-world dataset closely mirror those observed on E2V-Bench , suggesting that the benchmark captures core pedagogical chal-lenges present in authentic educational visuals. 

7 Conclusion 

We introduced the equation-to-visual generation task and E2V-Bench , a benchmark to support the study of generating pedagogically meaningful visu-als for arithmetic education. Grounded in primary-school math teachers’ insights and educational re-sources, E2V-Bench defines four visual types and includes automatic evaluation metrics. Our experi-ments show that current text-to-image models strug-gle with this task, while targeted strategies guided by E2V-Bench and supported by curated training data can partially reduce this gap. Together, these contributions establish a foundation for equation-to-visual generation in education and outline pathways for improving model performance. Limitations 

Scope of Representation Our method is scoped to early arithmetic education (Grades 1–3), focus-ing on the four basic operations and quantities be-low 20. This design choice reflects common class-room practice and enables a precise definition of pedagogical correctness. By constraining the scope, we are able to construct a well-grounded bench-mark and reliable evaluation framework. Nonethe-less, this focus limits direct applicability to larger quantities, more complex operations, and more ad-vanced mathematical concepts, such as fractions, ratios, or multi-step equations. Extending equation-to-visual generation beyond early arithmetic re-mains an important direction for future work. At the same time, given that current models already struggle in this elementary setting, reliable genera-tion for foundational arithmetic is a necessary first step. 

Coverage of Visual Types Our method mod-els four pedagogically grounded visual types dis-tilled from textbook analysis and validated through teacher feedback. These visual types capture recur-ring and widely used educational visual patterns in early arithmetic, enabling the task to be formalized and evaluated in a principled manner. However, they do not exhaust the full space of educational visual representations. Future work could expand the visual taxonomy to cover a broader range of pedagogical designs. 

Focus on Foundational Visual Accuracy Our evaluation focuses on visual correctness, specifi-cally quantity and structural alignment with the in-tended arithmetic concepts, rather than downstream learning outcomes. This emphasis is deliberate: ac-curate visual representation is a prerequisite for any instructional use, and our experiments show that current T2I models still exhibit low overall accu-racy on this task (with the strongest models achiev-ing around 20% overall accuracy). Because incor-rect quantities or structures can mislead learners, generated visuals should not be used in educational settings without human verification. Given this gap, establishing reliable generation and evaluation of correct visuals is a necessary first step before study-ing higher-level educational effects. Once model accuracy reaches a reliably high level, future work can incorporate human-centered studies to exam-ine learning outcomes, pedagogical impact, and practical teacher-facing deployment. 

Acknowledgements 

This project was supported by ETH AI Center Doc-toral Fellowships to Junling Wang and Boqi Chen, ETH AI Center Postdoctoral Fellowships to Hee-jin Do and Mubashara Akhtar, the Swiss AI Large Grant SCR1089274, and Swiss AI Small Grant #63, and a project grant from the SNSF (Grant No. 10009282). The authors also thank the reviewers, members of the LRE Lab and PEACH Lab at ETH Zurich, and the participants in the human evalua-tion experiments for their valuable feedback and contributions. 

References               

> Accessim. 2025. Illustrative Mathematics | v.360 Cur-riculum — accessim.org. https://accessim.org/ .[Accessed 22-12-2025]. Shivam Adarsh, Kumar Shridhar, Caglar Gulcehre, Nicholas Monath, and Mrinmaya Sachan. 2025. SIKeD: Self-guided iterative knowledge distillation for mathematical reasoning. In Findings of the As-sociation for Computational Linguistics: ACL 2025 ,pages 9868–9880, Vienna, Austria. Association for Computational Linguistics. N. Amini-Naieni, T. Han, and A. Zisserman. 2024. Countgd: Multi-modal open-world counting. In Ad-vances in Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS) .Abraham Arcavi. 2003. The role of visual representa-tions in the learning of mathematics. Educational studies in mathematics , 52(3):215–241. Blackforest. 2024. black-forest-labs/FLUX.1-dev ·Hugging Face —huggingface.co.
> https://huggingface.co/black-forest-labs/ FLUX.1-dev . [Accessed 12-02-2025]. Anton JH Boonen, Helen C Reed, Judith Schoonen-boom, and Jelle Jolles. 2016. It’s not a math lesson– we’re learning to draw! teachers’ use of visual rep-resentations in instructing word problem solving in sixth grade of elementary school. Frontline Learning Research , 4(5):55–82. Marc H Bornstein and Martha E Arterberry. 2010. The development of object categorization in young chil-dren: hierarchical inclusiveness, age, perceptual at-tribute, and group versus individual analyses. Devel-opmental psychology , 46(2):350. Pu Cao, Feng Zhou, Junyi Ji, Qingye Kong, Zhixiang Lv, Mingjian Zhang, Xuekun Zhao, Siqi Wu, Yinghui Lin, Qing Song, et al. 2025a. Preliminary explo-rations with gpt-4o (mni) native image generation.
> arXiv preprint arXiv:2505.05501 .

Yuefan Cao, Xuyang Guo, Jiayan Huo, Yingyu Liang, Zhenmei Shi, Zhao Song, Jiahao Zhang, and Zhen Zhuang. 2025b. Text-to-image diffusion models can-not count, and prompt refinement cannot help. arXiv preprint arXiv:2503.06884 .Marianella Casasola, Leslie B Cohen, and Elizabeth Chiarello. 2003. Six-month-old infants’ categoriza-tion of containment spatial relations. Child develop-ment , 74(3):679–693. Monjoy Narayan Choudhury, Junling Wang, Yifan Hou, and Mrinmaya Sachan. 2025. Can vision-language models solve visual math equations? In Proceedings of the 2025 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing , pages 10799–10808, Suzhou, China. Association for Computational Lin-guistics. Jennifer L Cooper, Pooja G Sidney, and Martha W Al-ibali. 2018. Who benefits from diagrams and illustra-tions in math problems? ability and attitudes matter. 

Applied Cognitive Psychology , 32(1):24–38. Tony Cotton, Caroline Clissold, Linda Glithro, Cherri Moseley, and Janet Rees. 2021. Oxford International Maths: Student Book 1 . Oxford University Press, Oxford, United Kingdom. Paperback edition. Chaorui Deng, Deyao Zhu, Kunchang Li, Chenhui Gou, Feng Li, Zeyu Wang, Shu Zhong, Weihao Yu, Xi-aonan Nie, Ziang Song, Guang Shi, and Haoqi Fan. 2025. Emerging properties in unified multimodal pretraining. arXiv preprint arXiv:2505.14683 .Utkarsh Dwivedi, Nitendra Rajput, Prasenjit Dey, and Blessin Varkey. 2017. Visualmath: An automated visualization system for understanding math word-problems. In Companion Proceedings of the 22nd International Conference on Intelligent User Inter-faces , pages 105–108. Patrick Esser, Sumith Kulal, Andreas Blattmann, Rahim Entezari, Jonas Müller, Harry Saini, Yam Levi, Do-minik Lorenz, Axel Sauer, Frederic Boesel, et al. 2024. Scaling rectified flow transformers for high-resolution image synthesis. In Forty-first Interna-tional Conference on Machine Learning .Maria Evagorou, Sibel Erduran, and Terhi Mäntylä. 2015. The role of visual representations in scien-tific practices: from conceptual understanding and knowledge generation to ‘seeing’how science works. 

International journal of Stem education , 2:1–13. flaticon. 2025. flaticon. https://www.flaticon.com .[Accessed 31-12-2025]. fun2dolabs. 2025. fun2dolabs. https://fun2dolabs. com . [Accessed 22-12-2025]. Hanan Gani, Shariq Farooq Bhat, Muzammal Naseer, Salman Khan, and Peter Wonka. 2024. LLM blueprint: Enabling text-to-image generation with complex and detailed prompts. In The Twelfth Inter-national Conference on Learning Representations .Gerald Goldin and Nina Shteingold. 2001. Systems of representations and the development of mathemati-cal concepts. The roles of representation in school mathematics , 2001:1–23. Google. 2025. Gemini 2.5 Flash (experimen-tal) | Gemini API | Google AI for Develop-ers — ai.google.dev. https://ai.google.dev/ gemini-api/docs/models . [Accessed 05-10-2025]. Lauren Harris, M Joseph Schaller, and Merrill M Mitler. 1970. The effects of stimulus type on performance in a color-form sorting task with preschool, kinder-garten, first-grade, and third-grade children. Child Development , pages 177–191. John Hoven and Barry Garelick. 2007. Singapore math: Simple or complex? Educational Leadership ,65(3):28. Susanna Kaitera and Sari Harmoinen. 2022. Develop-ing mathematical problem-solving skills in primary school by using visual representations on heuristics. 

LUMAT: International Journal on Math, Science and Technology Education , 10(2):111–146. Ivana Kajic, Olivia Wiles, Isabela Albuquerque, Matthias Bauer, Su Wang, Jordi Pont-Tuset, and Aida Nematzadeh. 2024. Evaluating numerical reasoning in text-to-image models. In The Thirty-eighth Con-ference on Neural Information Processing Systems Datasets and Benchmarks Track .Jimin Lee, Steven-Shine Chen, and Paul Pu Liang. 2025. Interactive sketchpad: A multimodal tutoring sys-tem for collaborative, visual problem-solving. In 

Proceedings of the Extended Abstracts of the CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Sys-tems , CHI EA ’25, New York, NY, USA. Association for Computing Machinery. Long Lian, Boyi Li, Adam Yala, and Trevor Darrell. 2024. LLM-grounded diffusion: Enhancing prompt understanding of text-to-image diffusion models with large language models. Transactions on Machine Learning Research . Featured Certification. Shilong Liu, Zhaoyang Zeng, Tianhe Ren, Feng Li, Hao Zhang, Jie Yang, Qing Jiang, Chunyuan Li, Jian-wei Yang, Hang Su, Jun Zhu, and Lei Zhang. 2025. Grounding dino: Marrying dino with grounded pre-training for open-set object detection. In Computer Vision – ECCV 2024 , pages 38–55, Cham. Springer Nature Switzerland. Ilya Loshchilov and Frank Hutter. 2019. Decoupled weight decay regularization. In 7th International Conference on Learning Representations, ICLR 2019, New Orleans, LA, USA, May 6-9, 2019 . OpenRe-view.net. Pan Lu, Hritik Bansal, Tony Xia, Jiacheng Liu, Chun-yuan Li, Hannaneh Hajishirzi, Hao Cheng, Kai-Wei Chang, Michel Galley, and Jianfeng Gao. 2024. Mathvista: Evaluating mathematical reasoning of foundation models in visual contexts. In Inter-national Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR) .Haohao Luo, Yang Deng, Ying Shen, See-Kiong Ng, and Tat-Seng Chua. 2024. Chain-of-exemplar: En-hancing distractor generation for multimodal educa-tional question generation. In Proceedings of the 62nd Annual Meeting of the Association for Com-putational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers) ,pages 7978–7993, Bangkok, Thailand. Association for Computational Linguistics. mathematics monster. 2025. Mathematics Mon-ster — mathematics-monster.com. https://www. mathematics-monster.com/ . [Accessed 22-12-2025]. Richard E. Mayer. 2002. Multimedia learning. vol-ume 41 of Psychology of Learning and Motivation ,pages 85–139. Academic Press. Miriam J Metzger, Andrew J Flanagin, and Lara Zwarun. 2003. College student web use, perceptions of infor-mation credibility, and verification behavior. Com-puters & Education , 41(3):271–290. Ministry of General Education and Instruction, Re-public of South Sudan. 2018. Primary Mathemat-ics: Pupil’s Book 2 . Mountain Top Publishers Ltd., Nairobi, Kenya. Funded by the Global Partnership for Education. Wenyi Mo, Tianyu Zhang, Yalong Bai, Bing Su, Ji-Rong Wen, and Qing Yang. 2024. Dynamic prompt opti-mizing for text-to-image generation. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition , pages 26627–26636. Lisa L Morin, Silvana MR Watson, Peggy Hester, and Sharon Raver. 2017. The use of a bar model drawing to teach word problem solving to students with math-ematics difficulties. Learning Disability Quarterly ,40(2):91–104. Cherri Moseley and Janet Rees. 2021. Cambridge Pri-mary Mathematics Digital Learner’s Book 2 , 2nd edition edition. Cambridge University Press, Cam-bridge, United Kingdom. Digital format. OpenAI. 2025. OpenAI Platform — plat-form.openai.com. https://platform.openai. com/docs/models/gpt-image-1 . [Accessed 24-09-2025]. opencv. 2025. opencv-python — pypi.org. https:// pypi.org/project/opencv-python/ . [Accessed 22-12-2025]. Sharifah Osman, Che Nurul Azieana Che Yang, Mohd Salleh Abu, Norulhuda Ismail, Hanifah Jam-bari, and Jeya Amantha Kumar. 2018. Enhanc-ing students’ mathematical problem-solving skills through bar model visualisation technique. Interna-tional Electronic Journal of Mathematics Education ,13(3):273–279. Prolific. 2025. Prolific | Easily collect high-quality data from real people — prolific.com. https:// www.prolific.com/ . [Accessed 13-02-2025]. Paul C Quinn, Ramesh S Bhatt, and Angela Hayden. 2008. Young infants readily use proximity to orga-nize visual pattern information. Acta Psychologica ,127(2):289–298. Rahul Ramachandran, Ali Garjani, Roman Bachmann, Andrei Atanov, O˘ guzhan Fatih Kar, and Amir Za-mir. 2025. How well does gpt-4o understand vi-sion? evaluating multimodal foundation models on standard computer vision tasks. arXiv preprint arXiv:2507.01955 .Recraft. 2025. Recraft v3. https://www.recraft. ai/docs#models . [Accessed 29-01-2025]. Nazmus Saquib, Rubaiat Habib Kazi, Li-yi Wei, Gloria Mark, and Deb Roy. 2021. Constructing embodied algebra by sketching. In Proceedings of the 2021 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems , pages 1–16. scikit learn. 2025. scikit-learn: machine learning in Python 2014; scikit-learn 0.16.1 documentation — scikit-learn.org. https://scikit-learn.org/ .[Accessed 22-12-2025]. Anjali Singh, Ruhi Sharma Mittal, Shubham Atreja, Mourvi Sharma, Seema Nagar, Prasenjit Dey, and Mohit Jain. 2019. Automatic generation of leveled visual assessments for young learners. In Proceed-ings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence ,volume 33, pages 9713–9720. Janvijay Singh, Vilém Zouhar, and Mrinmaya Sachan. 2023. Enhancing textbooks with visuals from the web for improved learning. In Proceedings of the 2023 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing , pages 11931–11944, Singa-pore. Association for Computational Linguistics. Marian Small and Amy Lin. 2025. Eyes on math: A visual approach to teaching math concepts . Teachers College Press. Junling Wang, Anna Rutkiewicz, April Wang, and Mrin-maya Sachan. 2025. Generating pedagogically mean-ingful visuals for math word problems: A new bench-mark and analysis of text-to-image models. In Find-ings of the Association for Computational Linguistics: ACL 2025 , pages 11229–11257, Vienna, Austria. As-sociation for Computational Linguistics. Ke Wang, Junting Pan, Weikang Shi, Zimu Lu, Mingjie Zhan, and Hongsheng Li. 2024. Measuring mul-timodal mathematical reasoning with math-vision dataset. arXiv preprint arXiv:2402.14804 .Jinheng Xie, Zhenheng Yang, and Mike Zheng Shou. 2025. Show-o2: Improved native unified multimodal models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2506.15564 .Yi Xu, Roger Smeets, and Rafael Bidarra. 2021. Pro-cedural generation of problems for elementary math education. International Journal of Serious Games ,8(2):49–66. Shih-Ying Yeh, Yu-Guan Hsieh, Zhidong Gao, Bernard BW Yang, Giyeong Oh, and Yanmin Gong. 2023. Navigating text-to-image customization: From lycoris fine-tuning to model evaluation. In The Twelfth International Conference on Learning Repre-sentations .

A Details of Thematic Analysis of Visual Types 

A.1 Procedure 

We conducted a thematic analysis to identify re-curring visual types from visuals collected across six educational sources, including three text-books (Ministry of General Education and Instruc-tion, Republic of South Sudan, 2018; Cotton et al., 2021; Moseley and Rees, 2021) and three online platforms (Accessim, 2025; mathematics monster, 2025; fun2dolabs, 2025). In total, we collected 189 visuals; seven were decorative and did not cor-respond to their associated equations, and were therefore excluded, leaving 182 visuals. In the initial phase, we sampled 50 visuals to identify recurring themes. Through iterative discussion, two researchers identified and consolidated four distinct visual types. Coding was performed col-laboratively, with a focus on refining the categories through close reading and comparison. In the systematic evaluation phase, the same two researchers manually analyzed the remaining 132 visuals. This broader analysis allowed us to as-sess the distribution of problems across the four identified visual types. 

A.2 Results 

The results of the systematic evaluation are pre-sented in Tab. 3. The distribution of examples is rel-atively balanced across spatial-based (54), object-based (50), container-based (49), and color-based (29) visual types, suggesting that the identified vi-sual types can effectively categorize visuals from educational sources. 

Category Spatial Object Container Color Count 54 50 49 29 

Table 3: Distribution of examples across visual types. 

B Dataset Details 

B.1 Statistics of E2V-Bench Dataset and Training Dataset 

The statistics of the E2V-Bench dataset are shown in Tab. 4, while those of our curated ground-truth training dataset are presented in Tab. 5.                                            

> Category Sub-category Train Test Total
> Visual Type Container-based 296 75 371 Spatial-based 296 75 371 Object-based 296 75 371 Color-based 296 75 371 Operation Addition 320 80 400 Subtraction 608 152 760 Multiplication 112 28 140 Division 144 40 184 Quantity Range 1–5 352 56 408 6–10 300 100 400 11–15 264 87 353 16–20 268 57 325
> Total 1184 300 1484

Table 4: Statistics of E2V-Bench dataset.                

> Category Sub-category Count
> Visual Type Container-based 57 Spatial-based 241 Object-based 389 Color-based 368 Operation Addition 157 Subtraction 759 Multiplication 106 Division 33 Quantity Range 1–5 609 6–10 276 11–15 114 16–20 56
> Total 1055

Table 5: Statistics of curated training dataset. 

B.2 Comparison of E2V-Bench with Existing Benchmarks 

We present the comparison of E2V-Bench with re-lated multimodal benchmarks in Tab. 6. 

C Experiments Details 

C.1 Naive Equation-to-Visual Generation 

We first explored a straightforward approach by directly prompting a T2I model to visualize equa-tions. Example outputs are shown in Fig. 8 and Fig. 9. As illustrated, the generated visuals mainly decorate the equation text with colors or stylistic effects, rather than producing meaningful represen-tations. Benchmark #Entries Domain Task Type Suitability for Arithmetic Edu-cation                        

> Evaluating Numerical Reasoning in T2I (Ka-jic et al., 2024) 1,386 Numbers, objects T2I generation Broad coverage of numerical rea-soning, but not designed for early arithmetic education. Math2Visual (Wang et al., 2025) 1,903 Math word problems Template-based visual genera-tion Targets math word problem edu-cation but lacks visual diversity due to its heavy reliance on tem-plates and icon datasets. MathVista (Lu et al., 2024) 6,141 Math + vision Multimodal VQA Evaluation on reasoning, not vi-sual generation. MATHVision (Wang et al., 2024) 3,040 General mathematics, competition-level problems Visual math problem-solving; multimodal reasoning evalua-tion Targets middle–high school competition-level math, not early arithmetic education. E2V-Bench (Ours) 5,738 (1,484 VD s + 4,072 VD –visual pairs + 182 real educational visuals) Arithmetic equations Equation-to-Visual generation Explicitly targets early arith-metic education with diverse, non-template-based visual gener-ation.

Table 6: Comparison of E2V-Bench with related multimodal benchmarks. 

Figure 8: Example of a visual generated by GPT-Image-1 with the prompt: “Create a cartoon style image to visualize this equation:3+4=7” 

Figure 9: Example of a visual generated by GPT-Image-1 with the prompt: “Create a realistic style image to visualize this equation:6+8=14” 

C.2 Automatic Metrics C.2.1 Quantity Accuracy 

For quantity accuracy, we use CountGD (Amini-Naieni et al., 2024) to automatically count object instances in generated visuals. 

C.2.2 Overall Accuracy 

For overall accuracy, we adopt a rule-based evalua-tion framework tailored to each visual type, imple-mented using OpenCV (opencv, 2025) and Scikit-Learn (scikit learn, 2025). Overall accuracy is defined at the image level: a generated visual is marked as correct only if it satisfies all task-specific structural and semantic constraints implied by the corresponding equation and visual type. Across all visual types, we first detect ob-jects using a counting-oriented detection model (CountGD (Amini-Naieni et al., 2024)), produc-ing object counts and bounding boxes that serve as shared inputs to downstream evaluations. Based on the annotated visual type, we then apply special-ized verification rules, as described below. 

Object-based visuals. For object-based visuals, overall accuracy is equivalent to quantity accuracy. A visual is considered correct if the detected num-ber of each object type exactly matches the ground-truth counts derived from the equation. 

Color-based visuals. For color-based visuals, we evaluate both count and color assignment. Using object bounding boxes from the counting stage, we extract object crops and estimate dominant colors in HSV space with Gaussian-weighted aggregation. A visual is marked correct only if (1) the number of detected objects matches the ground truth and (2) the multiset of predicted colors matches the expected color distribution. 

Spatial-based visuals. For spatial-based visuals, we verify whether objects are correctly grouped according to spatial relations (e.g., left/right or sep-arated groups). We apply a dual clustering strategy that combines spatial proximity and geometric sim-ilarity. Specifically, we first perform agglomerative hierarchical clustering with single linkage on ob-ject center coordinates to capture spatial adjacency, which is effective for separated or chain-like lay-outs. If this strategy fails to recover the expected grouping, we additionally apply k-means cluster-ing over object bounding box geometry (width and height) to distinguish groups based on size and po-sition. A visual is considered correct only if the predicted group sizes exactly match the ground-truth grouping specified by the equation. 

Container-based visuals. For container-based visuals, we jointly evaluate object–container assign-ment and count consistency. Container regions are detected using a grounding-based detector Ground-ingDINO (Liu et al., 2025), and objects are as-signed to containers based on spatial overlap and relative position. We use GroundingDINO for con-tainer detection because it generalizes better to container-like objects and achieves higher accu-racy than CountGD in our preliminary experiments. A visual is marked correct only if each container contains the exact number of objects specified by the equation. 

C.2.3 Metric Validation 

To validate the reliability of our automatic metrics, we compare automatic judgments against human annotations on both overall accuracy and quantity accuracy. Across all validation examples, Cohen’s 

κ between human annotations and automatic met-rics is 0.96 for both criteria, indicating strong agree-ment. To further examine whether this agreement is consistent across different conditions, we report fine-grained agreement rates by quantity range and visual type. For these subgroup analyses, we report agreement rates rather than Cohen’s κ, since some subsets contain relatively few examples, making subgroup-level κ less stable. As shown in Tables 7 and 8, the automatic metrics maintain high agree-ment with human annotations across all quantity ranges and visual types.                

> Quantity Range NOverall Agree. (%) Quantity Agree. (%)
> 1–5 10 90.0 90.0 6–10 53 100.0 100.0 11–15 75 100.0 100.0 16–20 78 100.0 100.0

Table 7: Metric–human agreement by quantity range. Agreement rates are reported for both overall correct-ness and quantity correctness.                

> Visual Type NOverall Agree. (%) Quantity Agree. (%)
> Color-based 54 100.0 100.0 Container-based 54 100.0 100.0 Spatial-based 54 100.0 100.0 Object-based 54 98.1 98.1

Table 8: Metric–human agreement by visual type. Agreement rates are reported for both overall correct-ness and quantity correctness. 

C.3 Prompts for Generating VD 

The prompt for generating object-based VD: 

You are a primary school math teacher. Your task is to create a simple visual description that corresponds to a given arithmetic equation. The visual description should use everyday objects that young children (Grades 1--3) can easily understand. Each operand in the equation should be represented by a different type of object to clearly distinguish the groups of numbers. Do not use colors or containers as distinguishing features; rely only on object types. In addition to the word problem, you must also provide: (1) the total count of each object type mentioned Here are some examples: ... Now, for the following equation, generate the outputs following the same style: Equation: {equation} Please respond in the following format: visual_description: <natural language visual description> object_count: { "<object_name>": <count>, ... } 

The prompt for generating color-based VD: 

You are a primary school math teacher. Your task is to create a simple visual description that corresponds to a given arithmetic equation. The visual description should use everyday objects that young children (Grades 1--3) can easily understand. Each operand should be represented by identical objects, differentiated only by their colors .In addition to the word problem, you must also provide: (1) the total count of the objects, and (2) a structured description of how quantities are grouped by color. Here are some examples: ... Now, for the following equation, generate the outputs following the same style: Equation: {equation} Please respond in the following format: visual_description: <natural language visual description> object_count: { "<object_name>": <total_count> } visual_structure: { "<object_name>": { "total": <total_count>, "<color_1>": <count>, "<color_2>": <count> }}

The prompt for generating spatial-based VD: 

You are a primary school math teacher. Your task is to create a simple visual description that corresponds to a given arithmetic equation. The visual description should use everyday objects that young children (Grades 1--3) can easily understand. Each operand should be represented by placing groups of objects in distinct spatial positions (e.g., left/right, near/far). In addition to the word problem, you must also provide: (1) the total count of the objects, and (2) a structured description of how quantities are grouped spatially. Here are some examples: ... Now, for the following equation, generate the outputs following the same style: Equation: {equation} Please respond in the following format: visual_description: <natural language visual description> object_count: { "<object_name>": <total_count> } visual_structure: { "group1": { "total": <count>, "<object_name>": <count> }, "group2": { "total": <count>, "<object_name>": <count> } }

The prompt for generating container-based VD: 

You are a primary school math teacher. Your task is to create a simple visual description that corresponds to a given arithmetic equation. The visual description should use everyday objects that young children (Grades 1--3) can easily understand. Each operand should be represented by placing objects into one or more containers. In addition to the word problem, you must also provide: (1) the total count of each object type, and (2) a structured description of how objects are distributed across containers. Here are some examples: ... Now, for the following equation, generate the outputs following the same style: Equation: {equation} Please respond in the following format: visual_description: <natural language visual description> object_count: { "<object_name>": <total_count> } visual_structure: { "<container1_name>": { "total": <count>, "< object_name>": <count> }, "<container2_name>": { "total": <count>, "< object_name>": <count> } }

C.4 Prompts for Generating Visuals 

The prompt for generating realistic style visuals: 

Create a realistic style image of: <visual description> 

The prompt for generating cartoon style visuals: 

Create a cartoon style image of: <visual description> 

C.5 Synthetic Data Generation and Style Conversion Synthetic data generation. We constructed a synthetic dataset using a template-based genera-tion pipeline grounded in arithmetic equations. We exclusively used equations from the E2V-Bench 

training split to avoid any data leakage. Given an equation and its annotated visual type, the pipeline deterministically parses the arithmetic operands and operator, and instantiates a corre-sponding visual scene using a library of icon assets. This icon library was collected from flaticon (flati-con, 2025) and consists of 20 high-quality PNG icons representing common objects appearing in E2V-Bench . Each visual is composed of one or more “groups”, where each group specifies (i) the object type (icon), (ii) the number of instances, and (iii) optional visual attributes such as color or container membership. A dynamic layout al-gorithm places these groups onto a fixed-size can-vas, automatically selecting grid dimensions, icon size, padding, and inter-group spacing to ensure balanced composition across a wide range of quan-tities. In parallel, we generate a paired VD using lan-guage templates aligned with the underlying arith-metic operation. For each sample, we also record structured metadata: including object counts, color assignments, container structure, and spatial group-ing, which is serialized into the accompanying CSV file. To increase diversity, each equation is rendered multiple times with randomized icon choices, color assignments, and layout configurations. 

Motivation for style conversion. The result-ing synthetic images are visually clean and icon-centric, which differs substantially from Bagel’s native generation distribution. Directly fine-tuning Bagel on these images risks overfitting to super-ficial stylistic artifacts rather than improving the model’s visual reasoning over quantities and group structure. To mitigate this mismatch, we apply Bagel’s image-to-image generation module to con-vert the synthetic images into Bagel-aligned visual styles before using them for training. 

Style conversion with Bagel. We perform style conversion using the original Bagel model in an image-conditioned generation setting. Given a syn-thetic icon-based image and its corresponding VD ,we prompt the model to regenerate the image in a realistic Bagel style while preserving the under-lying semantic structure. Specifically, each input image is passed through Bagel’s vision encoder and VAE, and generation is guided by a text prompt of the form: “Change this image to realistic style: [visual description]” .

Filtering and final dataset. After style conver-sion, we filtered the generated images with our automatic metrics. This process resulted in 3,017 high-quality images, which form the final synthetic extension used in our follow-up fine-tuning exper-iments. By separating structural generation from stylistic alignment, this pipeline allows us to inject large-scale, logically controlled supervision while maintaining compatibility with Bagel’s visual gen-eration space. 

C.6 Prompt Refinement Details 

We present the original prompt and the enhanced prompt for layout generation in LMD. Original prompt: 

You are an intelligent bounding box generator. I will provide you with a caption for a photo , image, or painting. Your task is to generate the bounding boxes for the objects mentioned in the caption, along with a background prompt describing the scene. The images are of size 512x512. The top-left corner has coordinate [0, 0]. The bottom-right corner has coordinnate [512, 512]. The bounding boxes should not overlap or go beyond the image boundaries. Each bounding box should be in the format of (object name, [top-left x coordinate, top-left y coordinate, box width, box height]) and should not include more than one object. Do not put objects that are already provided in the bounding boxes into the background prompt. Do not include non-existing or excluded objects in the background prompt. Use "A realistic scene" as the background prompt if no background is given in the prompt. If needed, you can make reasonable guesses. Please refer to the example below for the desired format. Caption: A realistic image of landscape scene depicting a green car parking on the left of a blue truck, with a red air balloon and a bird in the sky Objects: [( 'a green car ', [21, 281, 211, 159]), ('a blue truck ', [269, 283, 209, 160]), ( 'ared air balloon ', [66, 8, 145, 135]), ( 'abird ', [296, 42, 143, 100])] Background prompt: A realistic landscape scene Negative prompt: 

Enhanced prompt: 

You are an expert in drawing bounding box for layout-to-image generation. When drawing bounding box, you first think about a reasonable scene that can incorporate all objects, describe the scene in text. Then draw the bounding box for each object, output bounding box and the scene prompt. Note: 1. You can draw limited amount of other objects to make the whole image realistic, but the quantity of objects specified in the prompt should be accurate. 2. Bounding box should reflect the shape of the object, and the object mentioned in the prompt should be the focus of the image and their bounding box should be BIG for visualization. 3. If not specified in the prompt, make sure same type of objects are grouping together. If the prompt involve same type of objects in different color, group objects of the same color together. 4. Please place the bounding boxes in a natural and spatially sensible way: for example, objects should not be floating in the air. If there are too many objects, you can use a top-down view as indicated in the Background prompt. Similarly, if the objects are inside a container, you may also use a top view to make both the container and the objects visible. 5. Make sure no bounding box exceeds the image boundary. Example: 1. Input prompt: There are five balloons floating in the air. A short distance away, there are eight green balloons also floating. Output Bounding Box:[( 'balloon ', [8, 62, 95, 100]), ( 'balloon ', [115, 62, 96, 102]), ( 'balloon ', [9, 177, 93, 98]), ( 'balloon ', [118, 176, 96, 101]), ( 'balloon ', [14, 293, 97, 97]), ( 'balloon ', [294, 27, 97, 103]), ( 'balloon ', [403, 24, 100, 107]), ( 'balloon ', [291, 139, 102, 98]), ( 'balloon ',[410, 137, 95, 102]), ( 'balloon ',[285, 244, 107, 104]), ( 'balloon 

> ', [405, 244, 97, 105]), ( '
> balloon ', [284, 361, 110, 93]), ('balloon ', [407, 357, 100, 96])] Output Background Prompt: A realistic scene Negative prompt:

C.7 Details of SFT on Flux.1-dev 

We fine-tuned Flux.1-dev (12B parameters) for 10 epochs with 10 repetitions, using a batch size of 5. This batch size balanced GPU memory constraints (single RTX 4090) and batch diversity, which we found to improve convergence stability in prelim-inary runs. Gradient checkpointing was enabled to reduce memory consumption and allow deeper model tuning without sacrificing input resolution. For optimization, we used the AdamW_BF16 optimizer (Loshchilov and Hutter, 2019) with an initial learning rate of 1e-5. Learning rate was de-cayed with a polynomial scheduler and no warmup, which yielded smoother training dynamics com-pared to linear decay or cosine schedules. All fine-tuning was conducted with BF16 precision. To enable parameter-efficient fine-tuning, we adopted LoRA adapters via the Lycoris frame-work (Yeh et al., 2023), updating only the attention layers instead of full model weights. Images were generated at 1024 ×1024 resolution to ensure high-quality visuals suitable for educational use cases while remaining computationally feasible. Fine-tuning required approximately 48 hours per run on a single NVIDIA RTX 4090 GPU. 

C.8 Details of SFT on Bagel 

We fine-tuned BAGEL-MoT (7B parameters) for 10,000 optimizer steps. We used a packed-batch scheme of one sequence per rank targeting 10,240 tokens (flush at 11,520; per-sample cap 10,240) to balance GPU memory limits with sequence di-versity observed to aid convergence in preliminary runs. FSDP and non-reentrant activation check-pointing were enabled to reduce memory footprint and permit longer effective contexts without low-ering input fidelity. Images were generated at 1024 ×1024 resolution. For optimization, we used AdamW_BF16 opti-mizer (Loshchilov and Hutter, 2019) with an initial learning rate of 2 × 10 −5 (β1 = 0 .9, β2 = 0 .95 ,

ϵ = 1 × 10 −15 ) and gradient clipping at 1.0.The learning rate followed a constant schedule with 2000 warm-up steps. All fine-tuning was conducted in bfloat16 precision ( bf16 ) using 

torch.amp.autocast .To limit trainable state, we froze the VAE and enabled only the visual generation pathway (i.e., visual understanding disabled). We fine-tuned from the HuggingFace BAGEL checkpoint 2, loading EMA weights only before training. Fine-tuning required approximately 12 hours per run on a 4 NVIDIA GH200 GPUs. 

C.9 Ablation Results 

We further ablate the Bagel adaptation pipeline to disentangle the contribution of its major compo-nents, including GPT-Image-1 supervision, syn-thetic augmentation, style conversion, and RSFT. The full training pipeline is illustrated in Fig. 5, and the ablation results are reported in Tab. 9. The results show that fine-tuning on filtered GPT-Image-1 data provides a modest improvement in overall accuracy, from 5.7% to 6.3% , while quan-tity accuracy remains unchanged. In contrast, using synthetic data alone does not improve performance, yielding 5.0% overall accuracy, and directly com-bining GPT-Image-1 data with synthetic data with-out style conversion also provides limited benefit. This suggests that the synthetic visuals are not im-mediately effective as training data due to their distribution gap from Bagel-generated images. After applying Bagel style conversion to the syn-thetic data, performance improves substantially, with quantity accuracy increasing to 15 .3% and overall accuracy to 10 .3% . This indicates that style conversion helps align synthetic examples with Bagel’s visual distribution, making the structured synthetic supervision more useful. Finally, adding RSFT further improves overall accuracy to 14 .7% ,suggesting that iterative metric-guided selection helps refine the model toward outputs that better satisfy E2V correctness constraints. Overall, these    

> 2https://huggingface.co/ByteDance-Seed/BAGEL-7B-MoT 1-5 6-10 11-15 16-20 Quantity range 010 20 30 40 Overall accuracy (%)  GPT-Image-1 Bagel LMD Flux.1-dev

Figure 10: Overall accuracy across quantity ranges for cartoon-style visuals. The corresponding realistic-style results are shown in Fig. 3. 

results indicate that the gains come not merely from adding more data, but from combining high-quality GPT-Image-1 supervision, distribution-aligned syn-thetic augmentation, and iterative refinement.                                                                   

> Base GPT Synthetic Style Conv. RSFT Quant. Overall
> Bagel ––––8.0±3.15.7±2.6
> Bagel ✓–––8.0±3.16.3±2.8
> Bagel –✓––8.7±3.25.0±2.5
> Bagel ✓✓––8.7±3.25.7±2.6
> Bagel ✓✓✓–15 .3±4.110 .3±3.5
> Bagel ✓✓✓✓16 .7±4.314 .7±4.0

Table 9: Ablation of the Bagel adaptation pipeline on realistic-style E2V-Bench. GPT-Image-1 data supervi-sion, Bagel style conversion, and RSFT each contribute to the final improvement. GPT denotes GPT-Image-1 SFT, Synthetic denotes synthetic augmentation, Style Conv. denotes Bagel style conversion, and RSFT de-notes rejection-sampling supervised fine-tuning. 

C.10 Cartoon Style Results 

Tab. 10 presents the evaluation of T2I models on E2V-Bench for cartoon-style outputs. Figures 10 and 11 present the overall accuracy of cartoon style visuals generated by different models, evaluated across varying quantity ranges and visual types, respectively. 

C.11 Human Evaluation Details 

We conducted a human evaluation on a manually curated educational dataset of VD –visual pairs, as described in Sec. 3. The dataset was sourced from primary-school mathematics textbooks and online educational platforms. During manual curation, we collected visuals from arithmetic education sections covering the four basic operations that were accompanied by either an VD or a symbolic equation. For visuals that were associated only with equations and lacked Container Object Color Spatial             

> Visual type
> GPT-Image-1 Bagel LMD Flux.1-dev
> 329 17 19 412 511 016 320 3749
> 0510 15 20 25
> Accuracy (%)

Figure 11: Overall accuracy across visual types for cartoon-style visuals. The corresponding realistic-style results are shown in Fig. 4. 

an explicit VD , we manually authored a descriptive VD consistent with the visual content. Among the 182 collected visuals, 52 had corresponding VD s, while the remaining visuals were originally paired only with equations. During human evaluation, VD s were used as input prompts to the models. Two researchers in-dependently evaluated a total of 546 generated vi-suals by comparing them against the ground-truth images and assigning binary judgments for Quan-tity Accuracy and Overall Accuracy. A total of three annotation disagreements were identified and resolved through discussion. A screenshot of the annotation interface used in the human evaluation is provided in Fig. 12. 

C.12 Example Visuals from T2I Models 

We present example visuals generated by T2I mod-els on E2V-Bench in Fig. 13. 

C.13 Details of Error Analysis 

To better understand the performance drop ob-served at higher object counts, we conducted a man-ual error analysis on 208 randomly sampled gener-ated visuals from four representative T2I models: Bagel, FLUX.1-dev, GPT-Image-1, and LMD. We sampled 52 error cases per model and analyzed them qualitatively to identify recurring failure pat-terns. We used a two-stage coding procedure. First, we performed open coding on 40 randomly se-lected samples to identify the major error categories emerging from the generated visuals. Based on this process, we established four error types: quantity error, structural error, object mismatch, and other failures. We then applied this codebook to the re-maining samples using close coding. Because a Category Model Quantity Acc. (%) Overall Acc. (%)                                                                   

> DSL-based DSL-based method (ours) 98 .3±1.598 .3±1.5
> Prompt refinement PAE (Mo et al., 2024) 3.0±1.91.0±1.1
> Closed-source Recraft-v3 (Recraft, 2025) 5.7±2.62.7±1.8
> GPT-Image-1 (OpenAI, 2025) 22 .3±4.717 .0±4.2
> Diffusion-based SD-3.5-large (Esser et al., 2024) 8.3±3.15.0±2.5
> Flux.1-dev (Blackforest, 2024) 9.3±3.35.7±2.6
> Layout-to-image Blueprint (Gani et al., 2024) 1.3±1.31.0±1.1
> LMD (Lian et al., 2024) 15 .3±4.19.7±3.4
> Transformer-based Show-o2 (Xie et al., 2025) 4.3±2.33.0±1.9
> Bagel (Deng et al., 2025) 11 .0±3.68.0±3.1

Table 10: Evaluation of T2I models on E2V-Bench for cartoon-style outputs. We report quantity accuracy and overall accuracy with 95% confidence interval half-widths. As in the realistic-style setting, most T2I models struggle to preserve quantity and structure. SD-3.5-large denotes Stable Diffusion-3.5-large. 

Figure 12: Human evaluation interface. Annotators compared each generated visual against the corresponding ground-truth educational visual and assigned binary judgments for Quantity Accuracy and Overall Accuracy. Clicking the button indicates a correct judgment, while leaving it unclicked indicates an incorrect one. Visuals are shown in random order for each question. 

single visual could exhibit multiple problems, each sample was allowed to receive more than one error label. To provide a more fine-grained analysis of quan-tity errors, we further divided them into minor and major quantity errors. We define a minor quan-tity error as a mismatch of at most three objects relative to the target visual, and a major quantity error as a mismatch of more than three objects. Structural errors refer to failures in organizing the scene according to the intended visual types, such as missing groupings, incorrect color assignments, or absent containers. Object mismatch captures cases in which the generated object identity is in-correct. Other failures include cases such as no image being generated, blurred outputs, or errors introduced by the automatic metric. Overall, quantity-related errors dominated. Across all 208 sampled visuals, 33.17% were la-beled as minor quantity error and 57.21% as major quantity error, while structural error accounted for 16.83%, object mismatch for 11.06%, and other failures for 2.88%. A model-level breakdown further reveals differ-ent failure tendencies as shown in Fig. 14. Bagel and FLUX were dominated by major quantity errors (80.77% and 71.15%, respectively), sug-gesting difficulty in maintaining accurate object counts as scene complexity increases. GPT-Image-1 showed a higher proportion of minor quantity errors (57.69%), indicating that its failures were more often near-miss counting errors rather than severe deviations. LMD exhibited a comparatively high rate of object mismatch (34.62%), suggest-ing that in addition to counting difficulty, it also struggled to preserve the intended object identity. These findings indicate that the sharp performance drop for visuals with more objects is driven primar-Figure 13: Example visuals from four T2I models on the E2V-Bench task. Each column contains one of the four identified structures (Color-based, Object-based, Container-based, Spatial-based), with the input equation and visual description at the top. Each row shows outputs from a different model. Bagel Flux.1-dev GPT-Image-1 LMD 

> 0
> 20
> 40
> 60
> 80
> Percentage of error visuals  Minor quantity error
> Major quantity error
> Structural error
> Object mismatch
> Other

Figure 14: Distribution of manually coded error types across the four representative models. 

ily by quantity errors, with structural and semantic failures playing a secondary but still important role. 

D Teacher Interview Study Details 

D.1 Teacher Demographics 

We recruited ten primary school math teachers through Prolific (Prolific, 2025) and paid them 16.63 USD per hour, which is adequate given the participants’ country of residence. We present the participants’ demographics in Tab. 11. All par-ticipating teachers use English as the language of instruction. 

PID Teaching Experience Age Gender 

1 More than 10 years 46 Male 2 6–10 years 36 Female 3 1–2 years 28 Male 4 More than 10 years 54 Female 5 More than 10 years 34 Female 6 More than 10 years 51 Female 7 More than 10 years 53 Male 8 More than 10 years 42 Female 9 6–10 years 27 Female 10 More than 10 years 53 Female 

Table 11: Participants’ demographics including teaching experience, age, and gender. 

D.2 Study Procedure 

Our study obtained ethical approval, and written consent was collected from each participant. The study lasted between 45 minutes and one hour. Par-ticipants were first introduced to the background of the study and then completed four sessions, as described below. In the first session, participants were introduced to the four visual types, accompanied by example visuals for the four arithmetic operations (+, -, ×,

÷). After reviewing each design, they completed a questionnaire to provide feedback. In the second session, participants were pre-sented with 32 arithmetic problems randomly se-lected from the E2V-Bench test set. They then completed a questionnaire rating the usefulness of these problems for teaching arithmetic skills. In the third session, participants were shown ex-amples of realistic and cartoon style visuals. They were asked to indicate their preference between the two styles and explain their reasons. In the fourth session, participants were intro-duced to the definitions of our proposed evaluation criteria and asked to provide feedback on them. Finally, after completing all four sessions, par-ticipants were asked about their general experi-ences using visuals to teach arithmetic skills and the types of visuals they typically employ in their classrooms. 

D.3 Additional Results D.3.1 Teachers’ Evaluation of Visual Usefulness for Teaching 

We present teachers’ ratings of the usefulness of images following our proposed four visual types for teaching math equations in Tab. 12. Scores were collected on a seven-point Likert scale, with seven representing the most positive rating. Teach-ers consistently gave high ratings across all three statements, with averages close to seven (6.7-6.8) and low variance (0.18-0.46). These results indi-cate that, from the teachers’ perspective, visuals generated with our proposed visual types are useful for teaching and support students’ understanding of math equations. Teachers also indicated a strong willingness to use them in their own instruction.         

> Statement Average Variance
> Useful for teaching 6.80 0.18 Helpful for student understanding 6.70 0.23 Would like to use in teaching 6.70 0.46
> Table 12: Teacher ratings of the usefulness of visuals following the four visual types for teaching arithmetic skills. Scores are on a Likert scale from 1 to 7, where 7 indicates strongly agree.

D.3.2 Teachers’ Evaluation of Generated Arithmetic Problems for Teaching 

We present teachers’ ratings of generated arith-metic problems for teaching in Tab. 13. Scores were collected on a seven-point Likert scale, with seven representing the most positive rating. Teach-ers consistently gave high ratings across all three statements, with averages close to seven (6.7-6.9) and low variance (0.10-0.23). These results indi-cate that, from the teachers’ perspective, our gen-erated arithmetic problems are useful for teaching and support students’ understanding of math equa-tions. Teachers also indicated a strong willingness to use them in their own instruction.         

> Statement Average Variance
> Useful for teaching 6.70 0.23 Helpful for student understanding 6.70 0.23 Would like to use in teaching 6.90 0.10
> Table 13: Teacher ratings of the usefulness of generated arithmetic problems following the four visual types for teaching arithmetic skills. Scores are on a Likert scale from 1 to 7, where 7 indicates strongly agree.

D.3.3 Teachers’ Preference for Realistic and Cartoon Style Visuals 

We present teachers’ ratings of generated visuals in realistic and cartoon styles for teaching arithmetic skills in Tab. 14. Scores were collected on a seven-point Likert scale, with seven representing the most positive rating. Teachers gave high ratings for both styles, with the realistic style (6.3) rated slightly higher than the cartoon style (6.2), and variance remaining relatively low (0.84–0.90). Out of ten teachers, four gave higher scores to the realistic style. Six teachers also commented that realistic visuals are useful because students can more easily connect them with familiar objects from daily life (P1–4, P6–7), which helps students better under-stand the context of the problems. Three teachers gave higher scores to the cartoon style. Two teach-ers noted that cartoon visuals are commonly used in their teaching (P5, P10), while two teachers em-phasized that the simplified design of cartoon style can reduce student distractions by using plain back-grounds (P10) and identical objects (P7). These results suggest that both realistic and cartoon visu-als are perceived as useful for teaching arithmetic skills, with realistic visuals valued for their con-nection to students’ familiar real-world objects and cartoon visuals appreciated for their clarity and familiarity in educational contexts.     

> Statement Average Variance
> Realistic-style visuals are useful for teaching arithmetic skills. 6.30 0.90 Cartoon-style visuals are useful for teaching arithmetic skills. 6.20 0.84

Table 14: Teacher ratings of the usefulness of generated visuals in realistic and cartoon styles for teaching arith-metic skills. Scores are on a Likert scale from 1 to 7, where 7 indicate most useful. 

D.3.4 Teacher’s Evaluation of Visuals Across Visual Types 

We present teachers’ ratings of the usefulness of four visual types for teaching arithmetic operations in Tab. 15. Scores were collected on a seven-point Likert scale, with seven representing the most posi-tive rating. For addition, teachers rated color-based (6.6) and container-based (6.3) visuals as most useful. Seven teachers noted that color-based visuals effectively illustrate the idea of adding new objects into an existing group, while seven teachers emphasized that container-based visuals help clearly separate different groups, making it easier to highlight the part being added. For subtraction, container-based visuals were rated highest (6.1), followed by spatial-based (5.7). Five teachers mentioned that container-based visu-als make the subtraction process easier for students to understand. Three teachers also noted that com-bining visuals with narrative would be helpful for teaching the subtraction process. For multiplication and division, container-based visuals received the highest ratings (7.0 for multi-plication and 6.9 for division), with spatial-based visuals also considered useful (6.1 for multiplica-tion and 6.4 for division). Seven teachers com-mented that containers are the most effective way to represent groups in multiplication and division, while four teachers mentioned spatial-based visuals are helpful for showing how items can be grouped or partitioned. Overall, these results suggest that teachers’ eval-uations of visual types vary by operation. However, container-based visuals were consistently rated highly across all four operations, with particular strength for multiplication and division.                     

> Operation Color Object Spatial Container
> Addition 6.6 5.3 5.3 6.3 Subtraction 5.5 5.2 5.7 6.1 Multiplication 5.5 4.1 6.1 7.0 Division 5.6 5.1 6.4 6.9

Table 15: Teacher ratings of the usefulness of four visual types (color-based, object-based, spatial-based, container-based) for teaching different arithmetic opera-tions. Scores are on a Likert scale from 1 to 7, where 7 indicates most useful. 

D.3.5 Coverage of Visual Types and Teachers’ Current Teaching Visuals 

As shown in Tab. 16, teachers expressed very strong agreement with the statement that the four visual types capture the kinds of visuals they currently use when teaching arithmetic skills in Grades 1–3 (average = 6.90). The low variance (0.10) indicates a high level of consistency among teachers, sug-gesting that the proposed visual types closely align with existing classroom practices. All ten teachers reported that they have used visuals similar to our designs following the four visual types. Six teachers mentioned using cartoon-style visuals similar to our designs, while the other four indicated that they have used realistic-style visuals similar to our designs in their classroom teaching.    

> Statement Average Variance
> The four visual types cover the kinds of visuals used to teach arithmetic skills in Grades 1–3. 6.90 0.10

Table 16: Teachers’ ratings of the extent to which the four visual types cover visuals used in teaching arith-metic skills in Grades 1–3. Scores are on a Likert scale from 1 to 7, where 7 indicates strongly agree. 

E Ethical Consideration and Applications 

E.1 Potential Risks 

One potential risk is that generated visuals may be misinterpreted if they do not accurately capture the intended mathematical relationships, potentially leading to confusion among students and educators. To mitigate this risk, we collaborated closely with primary school mathematics teachers to develop a structured design space aligned with pedagogi-cal standards. The automatic metrics we propose further help ensure the correctness of the curated dataset. However, this dataset should not be used directly for educational purposes without the super-vision of educators. 

E.2 Terms of Use 

This section outlines the terms and conditions for the use of E2V-Bench . By using the code and datasets in this project, users agree to the following terms: 

Prohibited Use The code and datasets shall not be used for commercial purposes without prior writ-ten consent from the authors. 

Attribution When using or referencing the code and datasets, users must provide proper attribution to the original authors. 

No Warranty This project is provided as is with-out any warranties of any kind, either expressed or implied, including but not limited to fitness for a particular purpose. The authors are not responsible for any damage or loss resulting from the use of this project. 

Liability The authors shall not be held liable for any direct, indirect, incidental, special, exemplary, or consequential damages arising in any way out of the use of the E2V-Bench. 

Updates and Changes The authors reserve the right to make changes to the terms of this license or the E2V-Bench itself at any time. 

E.3 Compliance with Artifact Usage and Intended Use Specifications E.3.1 Compliance with Existing Artifact Usage 

In our study, we utilized a range of existing arti-facts, such as icons from Flaticon (flaticon, 2025) and visuals from six educational sources (Ministry of General Education and Instruction, Republic of South Sudan, 2018; Cotton et al., 2021; Mose-ley and Rees, 2021; Accessim, 2025; mathematics monster, 2025; fun2dolabs, 2025), to develop our datasets. We rigorously ensured that our usage of these materials was in strict accordance with their intended purposes. Additionally, we employed var-ious computational tools within their prescribed licensing terms, thus adhering to ethical and legal standards. 

E.3.2 Specification of Intended Use for Created Artifacts 

Our research resulted in two primary artifacts: (1) the E2V-Bench benchmark and evaluation frame-work, and (2) a curated training dataset for T2I model enhancement. 

Dataset License We will release E2V-Bench and the curated training dataset under the Creative Com-mons Attribution 4.0 International (CC BY 4.0) license, which permits use, redistribution, adapta-tion, and commercial use with proper attribution. The accompanying evaluation code and scripts will be released under the Apache License 2.0. 

E2V-Bench: Benchmark and Evaluation Frame-work Intended Use: E2V-Bench is intended for aca-demic research on multimodal learning, text-to-image generation, and educational AI. It supports systematic evaluation of models’ ability to generate pedagogically meaningful visual representations from arithmetic equations, and facilitates the de-velopment and comparison of model adaptation strategies. 

Restrictions: E2V-Bench is designed as a re-search benchmark and should not be used as a stan-dalone instructional system or deployed directly in classroom settings without additional validation. High-stakes educational or commercial use is dis-couraged unless supported by further empirical studies and ethical review. 

Ethical Considerations: The benchmark de-sign is grounded in analyses of publicly available educational materials and validated through consul-tations with primary school mathematics teachers. Users are encouraged to preserve the pedagogical intent of the visual types and evaluation criteria when extending or applying the benchmark. 

Curated Training Dataset for Model Enhance-ment Intended Use: The curated training dataset is in-tended to support research on improving T2I mod-els for equation-to-visual generation. It provides high-quality supervision for studying model adap-tation techniques. 

Restrictions: The dataset consists of automat-ically generated and filtered image–text pairs and may still contain inaccuracies or biases inherent to current generative models. It is therefore not recommended for direct instructional use or de-ployment in educational products without expert oversight. 

Data Ethics: All data are synthetically gener-ated or derived from open educational resources and do not contain personally identifiable informa-tion. The dataset is released for research purposes, and users are encouraged to adhere to responsible data usage practices consistent with educational and academic norms. 

E.4 Data Collection and Anonymization Procedures 

The benchmark and training datasets do not con-tain personal data. Arithmetic equations and corre-sponding word problems were generated by mod-els, and all visuals were produced using T2I mod-els. For components involving human participation, including teacher interviews and evaluations, no personally identifiable information was collected or retained. All feedback was anonymized prior to analysis. In addition, we conducted manual screen-ing to exclude offensive, sensitive, or inappropriate content. These procedures were adopted to ensure ethical data handling, participant privacy, and re-sponsible research practice. 

E.5 Artifact Documentation E.5.1 E2V-Bench Benchmark Domain Coverage E2V-Bench targets early arithmetic education (Grades 1–3), focusing on equation-to-visual generation for foundational arithmetic concepts. 

Operation Coverage The benchmark covers four basic arithmetic operations: addition, subtrac-tion, multiplication, and division, with quantities restricted to values suitable for primary school in-struction. 

Visual Types Each equation is associated with four pedagogically grounded visual types: container-based, object-based, color-based, and spatial-based representations. 

E.5.2 Curated Training Dataset Visual Style The dataset includes realistic style visuals. 

Content Scope All examples are derived from arithmetic equations and corresponding visual de-scriptions generated to support equation-to-visual learning. 

Demographic Representation The dataset does not encode demographic attributes. Its educational scope reflects arithmetic instruction practices rather than representations of specific populations. 

E.6 Use of AI Assistants in Research 

In our study, AI assistants were used sparingly and in accordance with ACL’s Policy on AI Writing Assistance. We utilized ChatGPT and Grammarly for basic paraphrasing and grammar checks, re-spectively. These tools were applied minimally to ensure the authenticity of our work and to ad-here strictly to the regulatory standards set by ACL. Our use of these AI tools was focused, responsible, and aimed at supplementing rather than replacing human input and expertise in our research process. 

E.7 Instructions Given To Participants E.7.1 Disclaimer for Annotators 

Thank you for participating in our evaluation pro-cess. Please read the following important points before you begin: • Voluntary Participation: Your participation is completely voluntary. You have the free-dom to withdraw from the task at any time without any consequences. • Confidentiality: All data you will be work-ing with is anonymized and does not contain any personal information. Your responses and scores will also be kept confidential. • Risk Disclaimer: This task does not involve any significant risks. It primarily consists of reading and scoring generated visuals. • Queries: If you have any questions or con-cerns during the task, please feel free to reach out to us. 

E.7.2 Instructions for Experiments 

Thank you for participating in our study. This re-search received ethical approval, and informed con-sent was obtained from all participants. The study took approximately one hour and consisted of four tasks. Please read the instructions below carefully. 

Task 1: Visual Type Evaluation You will be pre-sented with visuals representing arithmetic equa-tions across four visual types (container-based, object-based, color-based, and spatial-based) and the four basic arithmetic operations. For each set of visuals, please complete a questionnaire evaluating its usefulness for teaching arithmetic concepts in the classroom. Task 2: Visual Description Evaluation You will review 32 automatically generated visual descrip-tions corresponding to equations in our benchmark. Please rate whether each word problem is suitable for classroom use and alignment with instructional practice. 

Task 3: Visual Style Comparison You will eval-uate two visual styles: realistic and cartoon, for visualizing arithmetic equations. Please provide feedback on how effective each style may be for educational use, including perceived benefits and potential drawbacks in classroom settings. 

Task 4: Evaluation Criteria Feedback We will present the definitions of our proposed automatic evaluation metrics for generated visuals. Please comment on whether these criteria adequately cap-ture visual usefulness for teaching arithmetic and provide any suggestions for improvement. Please answer all questions honestly and feel free to share additional feedback throughout the study. Your responses will help validate our design choices and evaluation framework. Thank you for your time and valuable input. 

E.7.3 Data Consent 

The data you provide during this study will be used solely for academic research purposes. All informa-tion will be anonymized and securely stored, and any published or shared data will be aggregated to ensure your privacy. By participating, you agree to the use of your data as described, but you retain the right to withdraw your consent at any time with-out penalty. If you have any questions about how your data will be used, please feel free to ask the research team. 

F Details of DSL and DSL-based Visual Generation 

F.1 Details of DSL 

To support automatic generation and evaluation, we represent each equation–visual type pair using a simple DSL . The DSL explicitly encodes the visual type and the grouped object specifications required to represent the operands in the equation: 

t{gi{item , count , a t}} ni=1 ,

where t denotes the visual type, gi denotes the i-th operand group, item and count specify the ob-ject category and quantity within the group, and at

denotes the type-specific grouping attribute. Con-cretely, at is instantiated as color for color-based visuals, position for spatial-based visuals, and 

container for container-based visuals. For object-based visuals, the object category itself serves as the grouping cue, so no additional grouping at-tribute is required. For example, the equation 3 + 2 = 5 can be rep-resented differently depending on the visual type: 

> color{ group1{item: apple, count: 3, color: red} group2{item: apple, count: 2, color: blue} }object{ group1{item: apple, count: 3} group2{item: banana, count: 2} }spatial{ group1{item: apple, count: 3, position: left} group2{item: apple, count: 2, position: right} }container{ group1{item: apple, count: 3, container: basket} group2{item: apple, count: 2, container: box} }

This representation provides a compact semantic specification of the expected visual output. It is used both as a reference representation for auto-matic evaluation and as the input to our DSL-based visual generation pipeline. 

F.2 DSL-based Visual Generation 

We further implement a DSL-based visual gener-ation pipeline as a structured reference method. Unlike end-to-end T2I models, this method does not generate images directly from natural-language prompts. Instead, it renders visuals from the DSL using manually specified layout rules and icon as-sets. Therefore, it is not intended as a directly comparable T2I baseline, but rather as a reference method for assessing whether the visual semantics defined in our benchmark are well specified and renderable. Given a DSL instance, the renderer first identi-fies the target visual type t and parses the operand groups gi. It then selects corresponding icon as-sets based on the item field and places the required number of icons according to count and the group-ing attribute at. For color-based visuals, objects from different groups are rendered with different colors according to the color field. For spatial-based visuals, groups are placed in distinct spatial regions, such as left and right. For container-based There are three red toy cars and seven blue toy cars. How many toy cars are there in total? 

> Realistic Cartoon
> There are nine stickers and two crayons. If we take away the two crayons, how many items are left? There are two balloons on the left and two balloons on the right. How many balloons are in each group?

3 + 7 = 10 11 - 2 = 9 6 * 2 = 12 4 / 2 = 2 

Color-based Object-based Container-based Spatial-based 

> Six cups each have two candies. How many candies are there in total?

Figure 15: Example visuals generated by the DSL-based pipeline across different visual types and styles. 

visuals, objects are placed inside the specified con-tainers. For object-based visuals, different object categories are used to distinguish operand groups. To support stylistic variation, we manually col-lected 176 icons spanning both realistic and cartoon styles. The same DSL can therefore be rendered into different visual styles while preserving the underlying quantities and grouping structure. Ex-ample visuals generated by our DSL-based pipeline are shown in Fig. 15.