Title: Polaris: Scaling Up Instruction-Guided Image Generation Towards Millions of Personalized Style Needs

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2606.01858v1

Published Time: Tue, 02 Jun 2026 02:57:45 GMT

Number of Pages: 16

Markdown Content:
# Polaris: Scaling Up Instruction-Guided Image Generation Towards Millions of Personalized Style Needs 

Zhi-Kai Chen 1 2 Jun-Peng Jiang 1 2 Jun-Jie Tao 3 De-Chuan Zhan 1 2 Han-Jia Ye 1 2 Object Blind Spot          

> Generateanimageof
> humanhandinglove
> Generateanimageof
> beetlecar

Character Blind Spot        

> Generateapictureof
> Naruto
> Generateanimageof
> GenainCheburashka

Style Blind Spot        

> Generateadeepspace
> scene
> Generatea1920s-1930s
> cartonstylespiderman

Functional Blind Spot                                           

> Createa2DDND
> battlemap
> Generateaheightmap
> withAlpenmountains
> User’s
> Instruction
> Polaris
> Bagel
> ①Handanatomyismalformed
> ②Carbrandnotrecognized
> ③Wronghairstyleandoutfit
> ④Completelywrongcharactercreation
> ⑤Strangefloatingobjectsintheair
> ⑥Wrongeyepatchandchestemblem
> ⑦Low-resolutionDNDmap
> ⑧Misunderstandingofheightmap

Figure 1. Although large models fine-tuned on trillions of tokens better understand diverse user instructions, such as style generation, they still exhibit significant blind spots. We introduce Polaris, a retrieval framework over the Stable Diffusion model library that automatically identifies and invokes the most relevant models, addressing these blind spots and enabling diverse, personalized image generation. 

Abstract 

Users increasingly expect image generation mod-els to quickly adapt to highly diverse and personal-ized requirements, such as producing images with distinctive styles or characteristics. Traditional ap-proaches rely on fine-tuning, which is costly and difficult to scale. To cope with these limitations, the community has accumulated a growing library of fine-tuned modules and adapters, where each component targets specific generation needs and collectively serves as a foundation for handling new demands. This naturally raises a question: instead of repeatedly training new models, can we systematically exploit this expanding ecosystem to better fulfill user instructions? To this end, we present Polaris, an intelligent retrieval framework that automatically selects and integrates suitable models from the model library based on a user’s instructions. The key insight is that harnessing such a massive and heterogeneous pool requires not only finding the most relevant modules among  

> 1

School of Artificial Intelligence, Nanjing University, China 2

National Key Laboratory for Novel Software Technology, Nanjing University, China 3 Nanjing University, China . Correspondence to: Han-Jia Ye <yehj@lamda.nju.edu.cn >.

Preprint. June 2, 2026. 

thousands of candidates, but also aligning them effectively for instruction-driven generation and editing. Polaris addresses this challenge by index-ing over 6,500 checkpoints and 75,000 adapters, and retrieving the most relevant components given a user’s input and instruction. In doing so, it delivers scalable, controllable, and well-aligned generation—without any additional training. 

1. Introduction 

The field of image generation has witnessed remarkable progress (Zhang et al., 2023; Wei et al., 2025; Singh, 2023), particularly with the emergence of diffusion models that demonstrate strong capabilities in producing high-quality, diverse images (Song et al., 2020; Rombach et al., 2022; Podell et al., 2023; Yang et al., 2023). These models have been successfully applied to a wide range of practical down-stream tasks, including super-resolution (Gao et al., 2023), image completion (Saharia et al., 2022), style transfer (Qi et al., 2024), image segmentation (Tian et al., 2024), and im-age editing (Brooks et al., 2023a). Such advances have made generative models increasingly accessible to end users. Users’ needs are often highly diverse (Michelessa et al., 2025) and deeply personalized with real-time feedback. For example, they may wish to generate images in distinctive 1

> arXiv:2606.01858v1 [cs.CV] 1 Jun 2026 Polaris: Scaling Up Instruction-Guided Image Generation Towards Millions of Personalized Style Needs

artistic styles, replicate niche visual domains, or perform complex editing operations on existing content. Yet, due to issues such as data imbalance (Johnson & Khoshgoftaar, 2019) and catastrophic forgetting (Goodfellow et al., 2015; Loke et al., 2025; Lopez-Paz & Ranzato, 2022), no single model can reliably master this broad spectrum of styles and tasks. Even large-scale and heavily fine-tuned foun-dation models still fail to handle many of these long-tail requirements, despite being trained on billions of examples. For precise user needs, small-scale finetuning or generating task-specific adapters such as LoRA (Hu et al., 2022) often provides far more accurate customization than relying solely on a single foundation model. Yet each new requirement still necessitates training a new adapter or checkpoint, which incurs non-negligible costs in data collection and tuning. Building on this context, it is important to recognize that many users have already adopted more lightweight strategies in practice. Instead of training models from scratch, which is costly and time-consuming, they often start from a base model and leverage community-released checkpoints or adapters that capture distinctive styles, domains, or editing capabilities. Such components are openly shared through platforms including Civitai, PixAI, and Tensor.art, which collectively host tens of thousands of publicly available resources. This ecosystem substantially reduces the cost of customization and has enabled the rapid prototyping of diverse generative workflows. Motivated by these observa-tions, we ask whether these community-contributed modules can be systematically harnessed to extend and promote the capabilities of our model. If feasible, this paradigm would provide a lightweight and scalable alternative to traditional personalization methods, while simultaneously raising im-portant challenges in component selection and integration for downstream tasks such as instruction-driven generation. However, systematically exploiting this rich and heteroge-neous ecosystem is far from trivial. Two core challenges arise. First, user queries for personalized image generation are often semantically complex and multimodal. A sys-tem must not only interpret open-ended instructions and visual references, but also accurately ground them to the underlying style or domain that best reflects the user’s intent. Second, as the pool of checkpoints and adapters grows to tens of thousands, retrieval must be efficient and scalable; na ¨ıve search quickly becomes impractical for interactive generation. To address these challenges, we introduce Po-laris, a unified framework for instruction-driven style and capability selection. Polaris formulates this process as a multimodal retrieval task: it maps user intent to appropri-ate community models across style, domain, and concept dimensions. It incorporates an efficient search-and-rerank pipeline that ensures both scalability and responsiveness at interactive latency. With these designs, Polaris systematically harnesses community-contributed checkpoints and adapters to deliver instruction-driven image generation without requiring any additional training. It can directly parse user instructions, recommend the most suitable models, and produce high-quality outputs. Compared with approaches that optimize solely for instructional input, Polaris achieves substantial gains by leveraging its large-scale model library. As shown in Fig. 1, when large pretrained models struggle with rare or specialized concepts, Polaris offers an alternative gener-ation route that covers these blind spots through targeted community adapters, while maintaining clear advantages in inference efficiency. Together, these results establish Po-laris as a scalable and effective paradigm for controllable image generation and editing. Our contributions can be summarized as follows: • We emphasize the need to address highly diverse, user-specific requirements while maintaining efficiency, and demonstrate that leveraging a large model library offers a practical and flexible solution. • Our Polaris retrieves models using combined text and im-age queries and incorporates an efficient reranking strat-egy, enabling fast and scalable selection from tens of thousands of candidates. • By harnessing the model library, Polaris delivers high-quality outputs that adapt to diverse user instructions with real-time performance, enabling scalable and customiz-able image generation. 

Remark. Polaris focuses on a style-aware instruction set-ting, where the central requirement is to interpret and realize stylistic intent. This differs from the conventional image-editing setting, which centers on localized content modifica-tions, whereas Polaris enables style-driven transformations and style-consistent generation, including capabilities be-yond standard editing. 

2. Related Works 

2.1. Diffusion-Based Text-to-Image Generation. 

Diffusion models generate images by progressively denois-ing random noise under the guidance of a learned score func-tion (Ho et al., 2020; Song et al., 2021), which enables high-quality and diverse synthesis. Stable Diffusion (Rombach et al., 2022) further introduced the latent diffusion frame-work, operating in a compressed latent space to achieve an efficient tradeoff between computational cost and image fidelity. Since its initial release, multiple versions (v1, v2, SDXL (Podell et al., 2023), and the recent SD3/3.5 (Esser et al., 2024)) have been developed, continually improving resolution, fidelity, and controllability, making diffusion a dominant paradigm for text-to-image generation. 2Polaris: Scaling Up Instruction-Guided Image Generation Towards Millions of Personalized Style Needs 

2.2. Model Adaptation for Personalized Generation 

Model adaptation for personalization can be divided into checkpoint-based and adapter-based methods (He et al., 2022; Han et al., 2024). The former, such as full fine-tuning (Ruiz et al., 2023b) and DreamBooth (Ruiz et al., 2023a), directly update model parameters to learn new con-cepts, producing new checkpoints but often at the cost of data efficiency and forgetting. The latter, including LoRA (Hu et al., 2022) and Hypernetworks (Ha et al., 2016), insert lightweight adapters that preserve the base weights and support modular, efficient customization. In general, checkpoint-level adaptation enables stronger style or do-main shifts, while adapter-based methods are better suited for fine-grained or localized edits. Early model library (Ramesh & Chaudhari, 2021; Falk et al., 2025) were constructed at the checkpoint level, collecting full model states for reuse and comparison. With the grow-ing adoption of adapters such as LoRA, recent work has shifted toward adapter-level library (Huang et al., 2023; Zhao et al., 2024; Luo et al., 2024). However, these ap-proaches leave several gaps: they do not establish a clear index linking checkpoints and their associated adapters, they only support retrieval at a single granularity (either check-points or adapters), and in the image generation domain (e.g., Stylus) adapter retrieval is restricted to a single modal-ity without support for multimodal search. 

3. Preliminaries 

In this section, we first revisit the conventional instruction-guided image generation task and discuss representative approaches. We then introduce our extended formulation with personalized needs, which targets diverse and user-specific requirements and introduces new challenges. 

3.1. Instruction-Guided Image Generation 

Instruction-guided image generation aims to produce images that follow both a given text instruction I and, optionally, a reference image T . A common paradigm for this task is based on Stable Diffusion (SD), where the generation process is controlled by a model configuration. Typically, such a configuration includes a checkpoint c, which defines the base generative capability, and a LoRA adapter l, which provides task- or style-specific adaptations corresponding to users’ needs. To better align generative models with user intent, existing methods mainly take two directions: enhancing diffusion models with instruction-following ability, and leveraging multimodal large language models (MLLMs) (Yin et al., 2024; Zhang et al., 2024) to unify reasoning with genera-tion. For instance, InstructP2P (Brooks et al., 2023b) fine-tunes Stable Diffusion on synthetic instruction–image pairs, enabling edits guided directly by natural language. More recent work extends LLMs or MLLMs to incorporate image synthesis within a unified framework (Zhang et al., 2025). These approaches either model text and images jointly in an autoregressive manner (e.g., Emu (Sun et al., 2023), LaVIT (Jin et al., 2023), Chameleon (Team, 2024)), or combine autoregressive reasoning with diffusion-based generation (e.g., Transfusion (Zhou et al., 2024), LMFu-sion (Shi et al., 2024)). Such unified designs represent a promising step toward more general-purpose foundation models for controllable image generation with user intent. 

3.2. Instruction-Guided Image Generation with Personalized Needs 

While existing methods achieve good performance, directly fine-tuning models for each individual user is impracti-cal in real-world scenarios. User requirements are inher-ently diverse, and a single monolithic model cannot ad-equately capture such variation with high efficiency. Amore practical solution is to leverage the growing ecosys-tem of community-shared resources, including both base checkpoints and lightweight adapters for specific needs. We therefore extend the Model Library beyond conventional checkpoints to also include adapters, enabling composi-tional model configurations. Formally, we define the model library Z = C × L , where 

C = {c1, . . . , c Nc } denotes the set of base checkpoints and 

L = {l1, . . . , l Nl } the set of LoRA adapters specialized for different styles, domains, or objects. In practice, we collect over 6,500 checkpoints and 75,000 adapters from Civitai 1,resulting in millions of possible model configurations for scalable and highly customizable image generation. In this setting, our goal is to leverage the Model Library to adaptively match user requirements with suitable model configurations. Specifically, given a user query q = ( I, T ),we aim to retrieve the most relevant checkpoint c and adapter 

l from Z and use them for generation or editing. The process involves three key steps: (1) obtaining a representation of the query that captures both textual and visual intent, (2) retrieving the checkpoint and LoRA adapter that best align with user’s style intent, and (3) performing image generation or editing with the selected model configuration. 

Multi-Modal Instruction Embedding. To represent the query, we define an embedding zq that serves as the input to model retrieval. Rather than fusing I and T in a fixed manner, we select the dominant modality based on the type 

> 1https://civitai.com

3Polaris: Scaling Up Instruction-Guided Image Generation Towards Millions of Personalized Style Needs Replace the cat on 

> the image by a
> water color
> painting style cat
> Add a pixel art hat
> on the dog

Polaris: Scaling Up Instruction-Guided Image Generation Towards Millions of Personalized Style Needs 

User Instructions Instruction Parser 

+

+

> VLM
> "instruction_type": <0, 1, 2>,
> "subject": "<specific image region or
> object to edit>",
> "generation_prompt": "<description
> of the desired final image>",

Multimodal Retriever Adapter Generator 

Region Masker    

> SAM InstructP2P
> Replace Add
> Instruction type
> Generation Adapter Generation Mask

=

+   

> Generate Mask
> based on
> Instruction type
> Intent-to-Region Grounding
> Input Embedding
> Text Embedding
> Image Embedding
> Checkpoint #1
> Checkpoint #2
> Checkpoint #3
> Checkpoint #4
> Coarse Search Fine-grained
> Search
> Lora #1
> Lora #2
> Lora #3
> Lora #4
> User #1
> User #2
> LLM
> Two-Level Index Search Block Reranker Block
> Tree Attention Mask

+

=

+

> CLIP-guided
> Mask Selection
> Attention-driven
> Mask Generation
> Ricecake
> Style Ink
> Meow Meow Art Studio
> Ink cat
> Watercolor Style
> Dreamshaper
> PixelArt
> Pixel Survivors Character
> Vivi | Dog LoRA
> [LuisaP] Pixel art LORA
> Adapter
> Combination

Figure 2. An overview of Polaris for instruction-guided model selection. The method is divided into two parts: (1) an Instruction Parser and Region Masker for adapting to image editing, and (2) a Multimodal Retriever for finding suitable checkpoints and LoRA adapters based on user requirements. The retrieved adapters and generated masks are combined to guide diffusion-based image generation. 

of instruction. Formally, we define: 

zq =

(

ftext (T ), if β(q) = text-dominant ,fimg (I), if β(q) = image-dominant ,

where ftext and fimg are the text and image encoders, and 

β(q) denotes a modality selection rule defined over the instruction semantics. This selection reflects a key assumption in our setting: dif-ferent types of instructions emphasize different input modal-ities. For example, style transfer or global transformations rely more on T , while object-centric edits guided by image content rely more on I.

Retrieval Objective. Each candidate checkpoint c ∈ C 

and adapter l ∈ L has a precomputed embedding ϕc, ϕl.The similarity between the query and each candidate is computed as: 

sc(q, c ) = ⟨zq , ϕ c⟩, sl(q, l ) = ⟨zq , ϕ l⟩

We select the most relevant model components by: 

c∗ = arg max 

c∈C sc(q, c ), l∗ = arg max 

l∈L sl(q, l )

The final image x∗ is synthesized by applying the selected model configuration Θc∗,l ∗ under the guidance of the in-struction T :

x∗ = arg max 

x pΘc∗,l ∗ (x | ftext (T )) 

Through the model library paradigm, diverse user needs can be flexibly satisfied by selecting appropriate checkpoints and adapters. Nevertheless, two core challenges remain: (1) how to construct multi-modal embeddings that faithfully capture user intent under heterogeneous instructions, and (2) how to perform retrieval efficiently over a large repository of model components. 

4. Method 

4.1. Overview of Polaris 

We aim to enhance both the stylistic accuracy and diversity of instruction-guided image generation within our model library, facing two key challenges. First, textual instructions can be structurally complex. To interpret them, we use an 

Instruction Parser that processes text-only inputs to extract actionable intent, and a Region Masker that provides spatial grounding when the instruction specifies localized changes. These components focus purely on instruction understand-ing. Second, we use a Multimodal Retriever that performs checkpoint and adapter retrieval by jointly leveraging text and image embeddings, with an LLM Tree Rerank module for reranking. An overview is shown in Figure 2. 

4.2. Instruction Parser 

Since Polaris targets instruction-guided image generation but our retriever is primarily optimized for style person-alization, it does not natively decompose free-form user instructions. Therefore, we introduce an Instruction Parser 

to extract the essential intent from a user query q = ( I, T ),where I is an optional reference image and T is the textual instruction, and convert it into a structured representation suitable for downstream retrieval and generation. 4Polaris: Scaling Up Instruction-Guided Image Generation Towards Millions of Personalized Style Needs 

The parser leverages a vision–language model (VLM) to decomposes the instruction into three main elements, which we formally define as a mapping: 

P : ( I, T ) 7 → (t1, t 2, t 3) (1) where t1 denotes the instruction subject , i.e., the target ob-ject or region to be modified or generated; t2 denotes the 

instruction type , specifying the operation (e.g., “modify”, “replace”, “stylize”); and t3 denotes the generation prompt 

T ′, a refined or reformulated version of T designed to better align with the conditional diffusion model. In our imple-mentation, we leverage Qwen2.5-VL-7B (Bai et al., 2025) as the vision-language model to perform this instruction parsing. For a more detailed description of the prompts used by the instruction parser, please refer to the Appendix C.1. 

4.3. Region Masker 

The Region Masker grounds the instruction subject t1, iden-tified by the Instruction Parser, onto the user-provided image 

I. Its role is to localize the target region that should be mod-ified while preserving unrelated areas. For instructions that apply to the entire image (e.g., global style changes), the Region Masker is skipped, and the full image is treated as the modification region. 

General Case ( t2 = modify-type). We first apply a pre-trained segmentation model to generate a set of candidate masks M = {m1, m 2, . . . , m Nm }. For each mask, we compute a relevance score using a value function v(·) that measures the semantic similarity between the mask region and the parsed subject. The optimal mask is selected as: 

m∗ = arg max  

> m∈M

v(m, t 1) (2) The selected mask m∗ provides spatial constraints for the Adaptive Editor, ensuring that edits remain localized. In practice, we use the Segment Anything Model (SAM) (Kir-illov et al., 2023) to propose candidate regions, and compute relevance using a CLIP-based similarity function adapted to masked image inputs (Liang et al., 2023). Here, CLIP (Hes-sel et al., 2021) refers to a vision–language model trained to align images and text in a joint embedding space, making it well suited for evaluating mask–subject correspondence. 

Special Case ( t2 = add-type). For instructions involving object addition, SAM alone is insufficient. To better capture the intended region, we intersect the attention map from InstructP2P with the SAM-generated masks (Li et al., 2024), yielding a refined mask for the most relevant area to insert. 

4.4. Multimodal Retriever 

We construct two modality-specific indices offline: one for checkpoints C and one for adapters L. Each item—whether 1      

> 1
> 1
> 1
> 1
> 1
> 1
> 1
> 11
> …1
> …
> 1
> …1
> 1
> …
> 1
> 1
> 11
> …
> 1
> 1
> …1
> 1
> 1
> 1
> Evaluation Id
> Attention Mask
> Evaluation Prompt
> Attention Mask
> LLM Tree Reranking
> Evaluation Prompt
> For each LoRA, assign a
> relevance score from 0
> to 9 base on description,
> current evaluating Lora:
> Id_0, Id_1,
> Id_2, Id_3 +
> Evaluation
> Score for
> Id_0
> Evaluation
> Score for
> Id_1
> Evaluation
> Score for
> Id_2

Figure 3. An overview of the tree rerank method. By modifying the attention mask of the LLM, we enable the model to evaluate multiple adapters simultaneously while generating only a single token per evaluation. 

a base checkpoint or a LoRA adapter—is embedded into a shared representation space that combines textual and visual information using a CLIP encoder. For each model x (checkpoint c or adapter l), we first con-struct a visual embedding to capture its style-related gen-erative behavior. We leverage exemplar images produced by the community using the same model, as they implic-itly encode its visual characteristics—such as artistic style, color palette, composition tendencies, and domain speci-ficity. Since user-uploaded content may include noise or examples not representative of the model’s core capabil-ity, we apply filtering and quality control to retain only high–semantic consistency samples. The curated exemplars are then used to compute an average image embedding, grounding retrieval on the model’s actual observable output distribution. Complementarily, we also extract a text embedding from associated metadata, including model name, tags, release notes, and user descriptions, which provides high-level se-mantic cues aligned with user intents. Formally: 

zimg  

> x

= 1

m

> m

X

> i=1

CLIP img (Ix,i )

ztext  

> x

= CLIP text (metadata x)

(3) Both components are concatenated to yield the final multi-modal representation: 

zx = [ ztext  

> x

∥ zimg  

> x

] ∈ R2d (4) The resulting embeddings are stored in the checkpoint index 

C and adapter index L, enabling unified retrieval across 5Polaris: Scaling Up Instruction-Guided Image Generation Towards Millions of Personalized Style Needs 

modalities. To select with a user query q, we adopt a two-stage retrieval strategy: 

Level-1: Coarse checkpoint selection. We first identify the most relevant base model by computing similarity scores 

sc(q, c ) between the query and all entries in C:

c∗ = arg max  

> c∈C

sc(q, c ) (5) 

Level-2: Fine-grained adapter selection. Conditioned on the selected checkpoint c∗, we restrict the adapter search to a local neighborhood Lc∗ ⊆ L and identify the best-matched LoRA: 

l∗ = arg max 

> l∈L c∗

sl(q, l ) (6) The final pair (c∗, l ∗) is then used to generate the output image conditioned on the user instruction T , and optionally a reference image I. To further improve adapter selection, we incorporate an LLM-based refinement module inspired by Stylus (Luo et al., 2024). The LLM decomposes user instructions into sub-tasks and allocates LoRA adapters, which provide more precise control over global style and object-level edits. 

4.5. LLM-Based Reranking 

In the Multimodal Retriever stage, we use LLM to refine retrieved candidates based on textual compatibility with user instructions and model metadata, similar to Stylus’s reranking strategy. However, each LoRA adapter is asso-ciated with a textual description that must be provided to the LLM. As a result, when the candidate set is large, the prompt length can exceed 20000 tokens. This results in sig-nificant computational overhead due to the quadratic growth of LLM self-attention with sequence length. To address this, we propose a novel inference acceleration strategy called Tree Reranking , which balances retrieval quality and computational cost, making the reranking pro-cess more efficient and practical for deployment. The key idea is to modify the LLM’s attention mask so that multiple branches (representing different adapter candidates) can be scored in a single forward pass. As illustrated in Figure 3, the reranker generates scores for multiple LoRAs simultane-ously, then prunes low-scoring candidates and performs ad-ditional rounds of reranking on the remaining branches. By progressively narrowing the candidate pool, we drastically reduce the effective input length required at each stage. This tree-based speculative reranking effectively reduces redun-dant computation in attention mechanism, which would oth-erwise scale non-linearly with sequence length. In practice, our Tree Reranking approach yields a substantial speedup for the reranking module while maintaining high-quality adapter selection. 

4.6. Adaptive Editor 

To enable flexible and precise image editing, our system integrates three distinct types of adapters: (1) a base check-point that governs the overall image style, (2) a style LoRA that modulates finer stylistic elements, and (3) an object-specific LoRA that controls the visual characteristics of specific entities (e.g., animal breeds or object categories). The selection strategy for these adapters is conditioned on the nature of the user instruction. For instructions that focus on object replacement without explicit style control (e.g., “Replace the cat in the image with another breed”), we re-trieve the overall style checkpoint and the fine-grained style LoRA from the input image to preserve visual consistency with the original scene, while extracting the object-specific LoRA based on the textual instruction. In contrast, for instructions that involve both object manipulation and ex-plicit style transformation (e.g., “Replace the cat with a watercolor-style one”), we retrieve the overall style check-point and style LoRA from the textual prompt to reflect the desired stylistic shift, while still relying on the object-specific LoRA derived from the prompt to control entity-level appearance. Further details on how we distinguish between these instruction types and perform retrieval ac-cordingly are provided in the appendix C.2. 

5. Experiment 

Experimental Setup. We focus on instruction-guided im-age generation and propose enhancing performance through a model library, which retrieves components based on user instructions using model checkpoints and adapters. Details on its construction are in Appendix B. We compare our ap-proach with two fine-tuning methods: InstructP2P, which adapts Stable Diffusion with small-scale instructional data, and Bagel, which combines large diffusion models with LLM supervision. These baselines allow evaluation against both lightweight and high-resource fine-tuning methods. 

Evaluation Protocol. To assess instruction-following abil-ity, we adopt a subset of tasks from GE DIT -B ENCH (Liu et al., 2025)—including background change, style change, material alteration, subject replacement, and subject addi-tion. We focus on this subset because it contains style-related transformations, which form the natural intersection between our style-aware instruction setting and classical image editing. To further evaluate model performance under diverse, real-world user demands, we construct a supplementary bench-mark, User-Bench, derived from community usage. In prac-tice, users frequently upload the outputs of models to on-line communities after applying them to their own prompts, thereby providing both the input (the user prompt) and the 6Polaris: Scaling Up Instruction-Guided Image Generation Towards Millions of Personalized Style Needs 

Table 1. User-Bench results on two subcategories: Local style change and Style extraction. VQ (Visual Quality), EQ (Edit Quality), and their geometric mean (Overall) are reported. Polaris achieves significant gains on local style change compared to InstructP2P and attains competitive performance with unified multi-modal models, while obtaining the best results on style extraction. 

Style extraction Local style change 

VQ EQ Overall VQ EQ Overall InstructP2P 4.41 4.08 4.24 5.11 5.24 5.17 BAGEL 6.86 4.27 5.41 6.20 6.81 6.50 Polaris 7.33 5.50 6.35 5.84 6.19 6.01 

Table 2. The experimental results on Gedit-Bench (Liu et al., 2025) demonstrate the effectiveness of our strategy. Compared with InstructP2P, which relies on finetuning to support instructional inputs, our approach leverages retrieval from a model library to achieve superior performance. 

Background change Material alter Style change Subject add Subject replace 

InstructP2P 3.70 3.39 4.60 3.18 3.80 BAGEL 7.06 6.40 6.13 8.06 6.71 Polaris 4.31 4.57 5.00 3.23 3.76 1600 M   

> 0.765 M 0
> No Training Required for
> Polaris
> Bagel 191s
> Polaris - with
> Tree Rerank
> InstructP2P

Model Inferencing Cost 

> 9.58s
> Image generation - 25 .37 s
> Instruction Parser - 3.82s
> Region Masker - 2.10s
> Multimodel Retriever - 7.84s
> LLM Rerank - 39.28s
> 78s
> Polaris - w/o
> Tree Rerank

Model Training Cost   

> Bagel InstructP2P Polaris
> Training Image Pairs (M)
> LLM Rerank w/o tree rerank - 58.77s
> 98s

Figure 4. Comparison of training and inference efficiency across methods. Our approach, Polaris, requires no additional training and achieves inference time between the two baselines. Furthermore, by incorporating our proposed LLM Tree Rerank strategy, Polaris attains a 1.50× speedup in reranking, highlighting its practical efficiency advantage. 

corresponding output (the generated image). Leveraging this process, we curate a natural test set that reflects au-thentic user demands, and conduct a series of evaluations based on this dataset. The dataset construction process is detailed in Appendix D. We referred to GE DIT -B ENCH and employed VLM as the evaluation tool. The prompts used for the GPT-4o (OpenAI et al., 2024) evaluation are provided in Appendix E. 

5.1. Evaluating Training Blind Spots in Image Generation 

We evaluate our method on blind spots—cases where exist-ing finetuned models systematically fail to generate reliable outputs, despite massive training datasets. Such blind spots often arise from factors such as data imbalance or catas-trophic forgetting. To address this challenge, our method leverages retrieval from a model library, avoiding additional finetuning while substantially improving performance. We categorize blind spots into four types: object blind spots, character blind spots, style blind spots, and functional blind spots. As shown in Figure 1, our approach consistently outperforms the unified multi-modal baseline across all cat-egories, producing more faithful and diverse results. 

5.2. Evaluation: Quantitative and Qualitative Quantitative Result. On our User-Bench, we evaluate two tasks: Local Style Change and Style Extraction. Lo-cal Style Change, which involves editing within about 30 predefined styles, shows that our method outperforms In-structP2P and is comparable to Bagel, though its advantage is limited by the small and fixed style set. In contrast, Style Extraction treats each user request as a unique style, leading to a dramatic increase in style diversity and better reflect-ing real-world usage. As shown in Table 1, our method demonstrates clear superiority, particularly in rare or hard-to-describe styles, since our embedding-based style retrieval 7Polaris: Scaling Up Instruction-Guided Image Generation Towards Millions of Personalized Style Needs Original Bagel InstructP2P Polaris 

> Style
> Change
> Material
> Alter

Original Bagel InstructP2P Polaris      

> Background
> Change
> Object
> Replace
> Convert the image to a Japanese manga style. Modify the image style into line art.
> Replace the doctor's coat with a Merino wool sweater. Cutlery is made of food-grade stainless steel.
> Change the background to a cartoon park. Change the background to a forest.
> Replace the pizza with a croissant. Turn the tree branches in the image into a witch’s magic wand .
> Object
> Add
> Add a tennis ball flying towards her. Add a hot air balloon in the sky.

Figure 5. Qualitative results on different tasks of GE DIT -B ENCH (Liu et al., 2025). Polaris achieves notably higher instruction-following success rates and more faithful outputs than InstructP2P, effectively handling style transformations that remain challenging even after fine-tuning. Moreover, the knowledge coverage of Polaris is comparable to Bagel, a trillion-token scale pretrained model. 

captures nuanced user-specific requirements that traditional text-prompt-driven models often miss. On GEdit-Bench (Table 2), our framework delivers strong performance on common editing cases, achieving results on par with instruction-finetuned models such as InstructP2P. Notably, in scenarios involving substantial style transfor-mations, our approach exhibits clear advantages, underscor-ing its effectiveness in handling complex edits. Although large unified multi-modal models achieve higher overall scores, our framework—built upon conventional Stable Dif-fusion—comes remarkably close, highlighting the competi-tiveness of our lightweight and modular design. 

Qualitative Result. In Figure 5, we present qualitative comparisons on GEdit-Bench. On standard editing tests, our approach exhibits much stronger instruction following than InstructP2P, producing edits that are both faithful and visually coherent. Remarkably, in terms of visual quality, our results are comparable to those of Bagel, a trillion-token scale pretrained model. Additional qualitative results on User-Bench are provided in Appendix A. 

5.3. Efficiency 

We evaluate efficiency from two perspectives: training cost and inference latency, as shown in Figure 4. Our method requires no additional training or task-specific finetuning, in-troducing zero extra training overhead on top of the exist-ing model library. In contrast, Bagel and InstructP2P require 

∼1.6M and ∼765K image pairs, respectively, making our approach far more practical and deployment-ready without costly retraining. By building upon the shared model library, the training cost is effectively distributed across the entire community, rather than concentrated on a single provider. For inference, our method runs at ∼78s per image, faster than Bagel ( ∼191s) though slower than InstructP2P ( ∼9.5s). Moreover, by incorporating our LLM-based tree reranking strategy, we further achieve a 1.50x speedup in the rerank-ing stage. Considering the elimination of training cost, our approach achieves a highly favorable balance between effi-ciency and applicability. 8Polaris: Scaling Up Instruction-Guided Image Generation Towards Millions of Personalized Style Needs 

6. Conclusion 

We present Polaris, a retrieval-based framework that scales instruction-guided image generation using community mod-els. With multimodal retrieval and efficient adapter selec-tion, it better captures style intent while remaining efficient. This work shows the promise of retrieval-driven approaches for scalable, personalized generation. 

Impact Statement 

This paper presents work whose goal is to advance the field of Machine Learning. There are many potential societal consequences in our work, none of which we feel must be specifically highlighted here. 

References 

Bai, S., Chen, K., Liu, X., Wang, J., Ge, W., Song, S., Dang, K., Wang, P., Wang, S., Tang, J., Zhong, H., Zhu, Y., Yang, M., Li, Z., Wan, J., Wang, P., Ding, W., Fu, Z., Xu, Y., Ye, J., Zhang, X., Xie, T., Cheng, Z., Zhang, H., Yang, Z., Xu, H., and Lin, J. Qwen2.5-vl technical report, 2025. Brooks, T., Holynski, A., and Efros, A. A. Instructpix2pix: Learning to follow image editing instructions. In Pro-ceedings of the IEEE/CVF conference on computer vision and pattern recognition , pp. 18392–18402, 2023a. Brooks, T., Holynski, A., and Efros, A. A. Instructpix2pix: Learning to follow image editing instructions. In Pro-ceedings of the IEEE/CVF conference on computer vision and pattern recognition , pp. 18392–18402, 2023b. Esser, P., Kulal, S., Blattmann, A., Entezari, R., M ¨uller, J., Saini, H., Levi, Y., Lorenz, D., Sauer, A., Boesel, F., et al. Scaling rectified flow transformers for high-resolution image synthesis. In Forty-first international conference on machine learning , 2024. Falk, D., Meynent, L., Pfammatter, F., Sch ¨urholt, K., and Borth, D. A model zoo of vision transformers. arXiv preprint arXiv:2504.10231 , 2025. Gao, S., Liu, X., Zeng, B., Xu, S., Li, Y., Luo, X., Liu, J., Zhen, X., and Zhang, B. Implicit diffusion models for continuous super-resolution. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF conference on computer vision and pattern recognition , pp. 10021–10030, 2023. Goodfellow, I. J., Mirza, M., Xiao, D., Courville, A., and Bengio, Y. An empirical investigation of catastrophic for-getting in gradient-based neural networks. arXiv preprint arXiv:1312.6211 , 2015. Ha, D., Dai, A., and Le, Q. V. Hypernetworks. arXiv preprint arXiv:1609.09106 , 2016. Han, Z., Gao, C., Liu, J., Zhang, J., and Zhang, S. Q. Parameter-efficient fine-tuning for large models: A com-prehensive survey, 2024. He, J., Zhou, C., Ma, X., Berg-Kirkpatrick, T., and Neubig, G. Towards a unified view of parameter-efficient transfer learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2110.04366 , 2022. Hessel, J., Holtzman, A., Forbes, M., Bras, R. L., and Choi, Y. Clipscore: A reference-free evaluation metric for im-age captioning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2104.08718 , 2021. Ho, J., Jain, A., and Abbeel, P. Denoising diffusion proba-bilistic models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2006.11239 , 2020. Hu, E. J., Shen, Y., Wallis, P., Allen-Zhu, Z., Li, Y., Wang, S., Wang, L., Chen, W., et al. Lora: Low-rank adaptation of large language models. ICLR , 1(2):3, 2022. Huang, C., Liu, Q., Lin, B. Y., Pang, T., Du, C., and Lin, M. Lorahub: Efficient cross-task generalization via dynamic lora composition. arXiv preprint arXiv:2307.13269 ,2023. Jin, Y., Xu, K., Chen, L., Liao, C., Tan, J., Huang, Q., Chen, B., Lei, C., Liu, A., Song, C., et al. Unified language-vision pretraining in llm with dynamic discrete visual tokenization. arXiv preprint arXiv:2309.04669 , 2023. Johnson, J. M. and Khoshgoftaar, T. M. Survey on deep learning with class imbalance. Journal of Big Data , 2019. Kirillov, A., Mintun, E., Ravi, N., Mao, H., Rolland, C., Gustafson, L., Xiao, T., Whitehead, S., Berg, A. C., Lo, W.-Y., Dollar, P., and Girshick, R. Segment anything. In 

Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer Vision (ICCV) , pp. 4015–4026, October 2023. Li, S., Zeng, B., Feng, Y., Gao, S., Liu, X., Liu, J., Li, L., Tang, X., Hu, Y., Liu, J., et al. Zone: Zero-shot instruction-guided local editing. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition , pp. 6254–6263, 2024. Liang, F., Wu, B., Dai, X., Li, K., Zhao, Y., Zhang, H., Zhang, P., Vajda, P., and Marculescu, D. Open-vocabulary semantic segmentation with mask-adapted clip. In Pro-ceedings of the IEEE/CVF conference on computer vision and pattern recognition , pp. 7061–7070, 2023. Liu, S., Han, Y., Xing, P., Yin, F., Wang, R., Cheng, W., Liao, J., Wang, Y., Fu, H., Han, C., et al. Step1x-edit: A practical framework for general image editing. arXiv preprint arXiv:2504.17761 , 2025. Loke, B. S. Y., Quadri, F., Vivanco, G., Casagrande, M., and Fenollosa, S. Overcoming catastrophic forgetting in neural networks. arXiv preprint arXiv:2507.10485 , 2025. 9Polaris: Scaling Up Instruction-Guided Image Generation Towards Millions of Personalized Style Needs 

Lopez-Paz, D. and Ranzato, M. Gradient episodic memory for continual learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:1706.08840 ,2022. Luo, M., Wong, J., Trabucco, B., Huang, Y., Gonzalez, J. E., Salakhutdinov, R., Stoica, I., et al. Stylus: Automatic adapter selection for diffusion models. Advances in Neu-ral Information Processing Systems , 37:32888–32915, 2024. Michelessa, M., Ng, J., Hurter, C., and Lim, B. Y. Varif.ai to vary and verify user-driven diversity in scalable im-age generation. In Proceedings of the 2025 ACM De-signing Interactive Systems Conference , DIS ’25, pp. 1867–1885. ACM, July 2025. doi: 10.1145/3715336. 3735847. URL http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/ 3715336.3735847 .OpenAI et al. Gpt-4o system card. arXiv preprint arXiv:2410.21276 , 2024. Podell, D., English, Z., Lacey, K., Blattmann, A., Dockhorn, T., M ¨uller, J., Penna, J., and Rombach, R. Sdxl: Im-proving latent diffusion models for high-resolution image synthesis. arXiv preprint arXiv:2307.01952 , 2023. Qi, T., Fang, S., Wu, Y., Xie, H., Liu, J., Chen, L., He, Q., and Zhang, Y. Deadiff: An efficient stylization diffusion model with disentangled representations. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF conference on computer vision and pattern recognition , pp. 8693–8702, 2024. Ramesh, R. and Chaudhari, P. Model zoo: A grow-ing” brain” that learns continually. arXiv preprint arXiv:2106.03027 , 2021. Rombach, R., Blattmann, A., Lorenz, D., Esser, P., and Ommer, B. High-resolution image synthesis with latent diffusion models. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF con-ference on computer vision and pattern recognition , pp. 10684–10695, 2022. Ruiz, N., Li, Y., Jampani, V., Pritch, Y., Rubinstein, M., and Aberman, K. Dreambooth: Fine tuning text-to-image diffusion models for subject-driven generation. In Pro-ceedings of the IEEE/CVF conference on computer vision and pattern recognition , pp. 22500–22510, 2023a. Ruiz, N., Li, Y., Jampani, V., Pritch, Y., Rubinstein, M., and Aberman, K. Dreambooth: Fine tuning text-to-image diffusion models for subject-driven generation. In Pro-ceedings of the IEEE/CVF conference on computer vision and pattern recognition , pp. 22500–22510, 2023b. Saharia, C., Chan, W., Chang, H., Lee, C., Ho, J., Salimans, T., Fleet, D., and Norouzi, M. Palette: Image-to-image diffusion models. In ACM SIGGRAPH 2022 conference proceedings , pp. 1–10, 2022. Shi, W., Han, X., Zhou, C., Liang, W., Lin, X. V., Zettle-moyer, L., and Yu, L. Lmfusion: Adapting pretrained lan-guage models for multimodal generation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2412.15188 , 2024. Singh, A. A survey of ai text-to-image and ai text-to-video generators. In 2023 4th International Conference on Artificial Intelligence, Robotics and Control (AIRC) , pp. 32–36. IEEE, May 2023. doi: 10.1109/airc57904.2023. 10303174. Song, Y., Sohl-Dickstein, J., Kingma, D. P., Kumar, A., Er-mon, S., and Poole, B. Score-based generative modeling through stochastic differential equations. arXiv preprint arXiv:2011.13456 , 2020. Song, Y., Sohl-Dickstein, J., Kingma, D. P., Kumar, A., Er-mon, S., and Poole, B. Score-based generative modeling through stochastic differential equations, 2021. Sun, Q., Yu, Q., Cui, Y., Zhang, F., Zhang, X., Wang, Y., Gao, H., Liu, J., Huang, T., and Wang, X. Emu: Generative pretraining in multimodality. arXiv preprint arXiv:2307.05222 , 2023. Team, C. Chameleon: Mixed-modal early-fusion foundation models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2405.09818 , 2024. Tian, J., Aggarwal, L., Colaco, A., Kira, Z., and Gonzalez-Franco, M. Diffuse attend and segment: Unsupervised zero-shot segmentation using stable diffusion. In Proceed-ings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition , pp. 3554–3563, 2024. Wei, Y., Zheng, Y., Zhang, Y., Liu, M., Ji, Z., Zhang, L., and Zuo, W. Personalized image generation with deep generative models: A decade survey. arXiv preprint arXiv:2502.13081 , 2025. Yang, L., Zhang, Z., Song, Y., Hong, S., Xu, R., Zhao, Y., Zhang, W., Cui, B., and Yang, M.-H. Diffusion models: A comprehensive survey of methods and applications. 

ACM computing surveys , 56(4):1–39, 2023. Yin, S., Fu, C., Zhao, S., Li, K., Sun, X., Xu, T., and Chen, E. A survey on multimodal large language models. 

National Science Review , 11(12), November 2024. ISSN 2053-714X. doi: 10.1093/nsr/nwae403. Zhang, D., Yu, Y., Dong, J., Li, C., Su, D., Chu, C., and Yu, D. Mm-llms: Recent advances in multimodal large lan-guage models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2401.13601 , 2024. Zhang, T., Wang, Z., Huang, J., Tasnim, M. M., and Shi, W. A survey of diffusion based image genera-tion models: Issues and their solutions. arXiv preprint arXiv:2308.13142 , 2023. 10 Polaris: Scaling Up Instruction-Guided Image Generation Towards Millions of Personalized Style Needs 

Zhang, X., Guo, J., Zhao, S., Fu, M., Duan, L., Hu, J., Chng, Y. X., Wang, G.-H., Chen, Q.-G., Xu, Z., Luo, W., and Zhang, K. Unified multimodal understanding and gener-ation models: Advances, challenges, and opportunities, 2025. Zhao, Z., Gan, L., Wang, G., Zhou, W., Yang, H., Kuang, K., and Wu, F. Loraretriever: Input-aware lora retrieval and composition for mixed tasks in the wild. arXiv preprint arXiv:2402.09997 , 2024. Zhou, C., Yu, L., Babu, A., Tirumala, K., Yasunaga, M., Shamis, L., Kahn, J., Ma, X., Zettlemoyer, L., and Levy, O. Transfusion: Predict the next token and dif-fuse images with one multi-modal model. arXiv preprint arXiv:2408.11039 , 2024. 11 Polaris: Scaling Up Instruction-Guided Image Generation Towards Millions of Personalized Style Needs 

A. Additional Experiment Results 

Figure 6 provides additional qualitative results on the User-Bench benchmark. For the style extraction task, our method produces outputs with clearer adherence to the input instructions and more consistent stylistic fidelity compared to both baselines. For the local style change task, our approach delivers more targeted edits while preserving the surrounding content, outperforming InstructP2P and achieving results comparable to Bagel. These examples further illustrate the model’s ability to handle user-driven stylistic transformations under different editing scenarios. Reference Bagel InstructP2P Polaris   

> Generate an image of wetland based on the style of the input image.
> Style extraction
> Generate an image of wetland based on the style of the input image.
> Local style change
> Generate an image of watch based on the style of the input image.
> Generate an image of forest based on the style of the input image.
> Original Bagel InstructP2P Polaris
> Apply Steampunk style to the wrench.
> Replace the woman's dress with a magical, glowing gown.
> Replace the woman's jacket with a pastel-colored one.
> Apply Oil Painting style to the woman's jacket.

Figure 6. Experimental results on User-Bench. In the style extraction task, our method outperforms both baselines in terms of instruction understanding and generation quality. In the local style change task, our results surpass InstructP2P and are comparable to those of Bagel. 

B. Implementation Details 

We use Stable Diffusion 1.5 (SD 1.5) as the baseline generative model for all experiments, as it is the most widely adopted open-source backbone with extensive community-contributed adapters. We collect models from the Civitai platform, excluding those containing NSFW content. To build our retrieval system, we construct a model library comprising approximately 6,700 community-shared checkpoints, each representing a user-uploaded variant of SD 1.5, together with about 75,000 LoRA adapters (split following (Luo et al., 2024)). Among these adapters, roughly 9,000 are dedicated to style generation and 65,000 to object generation, each paired with embeddings that encode their style or task specifications. For reranking retrieved candidates, we employ Qwen2.5-14B as a large language model (LLM) reranker, which improves alignment between user instructions and the selected checkpoints or LoRAs. Both the base diffusion model and all variants in the database are implemented within the SD 1.5 framework, ensuring compatibility and controllability across the system. 

C. Method Details 

C.1. Instruction Parser 

To interpret user inputs, we employ a vision–language model (VLM) guided by a tailored prompt. The parser analyzes the instruction along several dimensions: instruction type (categorizing the input task), style transformation (whether a style 12 Polaris: Scaling Up Instruction-Guided Image Generation Towards Millions of Personalized Style Needs 

change is required), subject (the target entity of modification), generation prompt (translating instructions into standard prompts since SD 1.5 does not support direct instruction inputs), contour compatibility (whether large-scale shape changes are involved), and foreground elements (which foreground objects are to be edited). The full prompt design is provided in Table 3. 

C.2. Adapter Editor 

During image generation, we employ three types of adapters to influence the final output: style checkpoints , style LoRAs , and 

object LoRAs . Depending on the instruction, different modalities are used for retrieval. For instructions that do not involve style transformation, we aim to preserve the original style of the edited image. In this case, a style checkpoint and a style LoRA are retrieved using image embeddings, while the object LoRA is retrieved using text embeddings. For instructions that explicitly involve style transformation, the original style is not preserved; instead, the style checkpoint, style LoRA, and object LoRA are all retrieved using text embeddings. 

D. Dataset Generation 

The evaluation dataset is constructed from user-uploaded images on Civitai, covering generations produced by diverse models. To ensure fair testing, we specifically select outputs generated by models with architectures different from SD 1.5. This structural difference keeps the test data disjoint from both the training data of the baseline model and the retrieval database, ensuring that neither the base model nor the retrieved checkpoints and LoRAs have been exposed to the evaluation samples. We design two types of test cases: style extraction and local style change . For the local style change task, we employ 

Qwen2.5-VL-7B to automatically generate prompts conditioned on the downloaded images. The complete prompt design is summarized in Table 4. For the style extraction task, we first construct a subject pool and then randomly sample one subject. The resulting textual instruction is formulated as: “Generate an image of ¡subject¿ based on the style of the input image.” 

E. Evaluation Prompt 

We use GPT-5o-mini to evaluate the final results on User-Bench. For the two tasks, Local Style Change and Style Extraction ,we design different evaluation prompts to better capture task-specific objectives. The prompt used for assessing style transformation in image editing is summarized in Table 5. 

F. LLM Usage 

Large language models (LLMs) were used only for minor language editing and polishing of the manuscript. They were not involved in the design of the research, development of methods, execution of experiments, analysis of results, or generation of scientific content. The authors take full responsibility for the final content of the paper. 13 Polaris: Scaling Up Instruction-Guided Image Generation Towards Millions of Personalized Style Needs 

Given a user’s image editing request in natural language, extract the following elements: 1. ”instruction type”: Identify the editing intent. 

- 0 = Category change • Condition: The target object’s core category changes to a different class .Decide only by category, not by verbs like “replace/change”. If A and B share the same high-level category, do not use 0. • Examples: ”change the cat to a dog”, ”replace a chair with a table” • Note: If the target category stays the same but only style/appearance changes (e.g., ”replace the cat by a watercolor cat”), use 2 instead. - 1 = Add new object • Condition: A new object/element is introduced into the scene. • Examples: ”add a hat to the person”, ”put a bird in the sky”, ”add a tree next to the house” - 2 = Local style/appearance transformation • Condition: The object category remains the same, but its style/appearance changes. • Examples: ”make the cloth black and white”, ”turn the cat into a watercolor cat”, ”change the shoe into a red shoe” • Special case: If the modification explicitly targets the ”background” (e.g., ”adjust the background to a forest”, ”make the background blurry”), treat it as type 2, since ”background” is a specific region rather than the whole image. - 3 = Global style/appearance transformation • Condition: A style/effect is applied to the entire image. • Examples: ”make the image black and white”, ”apply a watercolor filter to the whole picture” - 4 = Style transfer from reference image • Condition: The user provides a reference image and requests generating new content (objects, scenes, characters, etc.) in the style of that reference image .• Key difference: Unlike 0–3, this does not edit the original image; the reference serves only as a style source. • Examples: ”generate a cat in the style of the reference image”, ”create a cityscape with the style from the given artwork”. 

2. ”style transformation”: Binary flag (0 or 1). 

- Relevant for instruction type = 0 or 1. - 1 = The request explicitly specifies a style or artistic effect. • Example: ”turn the cat into a watercolor dog” → 1• Example: ”add a watercolor cat” → 1- 0 = No style/effect is mentioned. • Example: ”change the cat to a dog” → 0• Example: ”add a cat” → 0- For instruction type = 2 or 3, this value is always 1 by definition. 

3. ”subject” 

Must strictly follow this structure → ”<TARGET TYPE >+ <LOCAL RANGE >”. - <TARGET TYPE >: The core object name, no possessive forms. • Correct: ”cloth”, ”shoe” • Incorrect: ”girl’s cloth”, ”man’s shoe” - <LOCAL RANGE >: Spatial area where the target is located. • Examples: ”on the upper body”, ”in the foreground”, ”near the tree” 

4. ”generation prompt” 

Describe only the final appearance of the object/region. - Do NOT mention the editing action (replace/change/remove). - Do NOT add attributes beyond the request. - Keep it concise, faithful, and specific. 

5. ”contour compatibility”: Strict binary flag (0 or 1). 

- 0 = Contour differs significantly. • Examples: ”flag → hat”, ”book → vase” - 1 = Contour is compatible. • Examples: ”apple → orange”, ”car → bus” 

6. ”foreground elements” 

A JSON array listing the distinct foreground objects in the image request. - Each element should be a simple noun phrase (e.g., ”dog”, ”tree”, ”man”, ”hat”). - Keep them concise, no extra adjectives unless explicitly requested. - MUST NOT be empty. If uncertain, infer plausible main foreground objects from the request context. 

Respond strictly in the following JSON format: 

{

"instruction type": <0|1|2|3|4>, "style transformation": <0|1>, "subject": "<specific image region or object to edit>", "generation prompt": "<final desired description>", "contour compatibility": <0|1>, "foreground elements": ["<object1>", "<object2>", ...] 

}

User’s request: "{prompt }"

Table 3. Analyst prompt specification. The table outlines the schema and annotation rules used to extract structured representations, including instruction type, style transformation, subject, generation prompt, contour compatibility, and foreground elements. 

14 Polaris: Scaling Up Instruction-Guided Image Generation Towards Millions of Personalized Style Needs 

You are given an input image. 

The target visual style (S) for this edit is: "{style }". You must apply this style as instructed below. Please follow these instructions carefully: 

1. First, Identify and enumerate ALL main subjects in the image. 

A ’subject’ refers to any physically distinct person, animal, object, background/scene, or any major visible part of a person or animal, such as hair (hairstyle), face, upper body clothing (shirt, jacket, dress), or lower body clothing (pants, skirt, dress). Do not include minor details like shoes, socks, glasses, or small accessories as separate subjects. - For any person or animal, list major visible parts as separate subjects if they are visually distinct (for example: (1) person’s hair, (2) person’s face, (3) person’s shirt, (4) person’s pants, etc.). - For any object that a person or animal is interacting with (e.g., a guitar being played, a book being held), also include it as a separate subject. - Do NOT combine multiple items or persons as one subject. List each main subject and each major visible part separately. - Example list: (1) Woman’s hair (2) Woman’s face (3) Woman’s dress (4) Guitar (being played by the woman) (5) Microphone (6) The stage background 

2.Count the number of subjects you listed, and use this as ’num subjects’. 3. If num subjects >1: 

- Randomly select only one subject to edit (for example, choose subject (4): Guitar). - Replace the selected subject with a different object, entity, or new scene. - Apply the style "{style }" ONLY to the replaced/new subject. Do NOT apply this style to the entire image. All other subjects and the rest of the image should keep their original style and appearance. - Clearly state which subject (by number and description) was chosen in your edit instruction. 

4. If num subjects = 1: 

- Do NOT replace the subject. Only apply the style ¨ style¨ to the subject (and its background if the subject is the background itself). 

5. Under no circumstances should you replace or modify more than one subject at a time. Do NOT apply the style globally. 6. Your response must be a JSON object using the following format: 

{

"subjects": [ <a list of identified subjects as strings> ], "num subjects": <int>, "edit instruction": "<one concise sentence describing the single subject replacement (if any) and the style change, clearly stating the chosen subject by number and description>", "result prompt": "<a detailed description of the final image after editing, focusing on what is visually present in the image. The description should not mention any editing actions or changes. Only describe what can be directly seen in the resulting image.>" 

}

Do NOT include markdown, code fences, or commentary — return only the JSON object. 

Table 4. Prompt template provided to the VLM during dataset construction. It specifies how the model should enumerate image subjects, select a single editing target, apply the designated visual style locally, and output a structured JSON object representing the generated image editing instruction. 

15 Polaris: Scaling Up Instruction-Guided Image Generation Towards Millions of Personalized Style Needs 

System / Judge Instruction 

You are an image evaluation model. The evaluation target is “Image Editing with Style Transformation.” Important Instruction: You must always return a result, even if it’s not perfect. Ensure that you provide the requested evaluation for the image modification, including the scores and the reasons. 

Task Definition 

The user provides a source image (with the object/region to be edited) and a text description. The model must keep the overall structure of the source image while 

modifying the specified object/region , transforming it into a new form and/or applying a new style. 

Inputs 

- Source image: <SRC IMAGE >

- Candidate image: <CAND IMAGE >

- User text prompt: <USER TEXT >

Evaluation Focus 

- Style integration : Does the new style of the modified part appear consistent and well integrated with the whole image? - Structural consistency : Are unmodified regions preserved without unnecessary changes or corruption? - Image quality : Is the generated image visually clean, stable, and free of major flaws? - actual modification : To what extent have real, meaningful modifications been made to the image? 

Scoring Rubric (Scores 0–4) Style integration Structural consistency 

0: Style completely wrong 1: Slightly aligned 2: Some correct, poor integration 3: Largely consistent 4: Highly consistent 0: Severe redraw/corruption 1: Most areas degraded 2: Majority preserved, issues 3: Largely preserved 4: Fully preserved 

Image quality Actual modification 

0: Severe artifacts 1: Major flaws 2: Acceptable 3: Good quality 4: Polished 0: No real modification 1: Minor tweaks only 2: Substantial change 3: Significant changes 4: Major mods, intact structure 

Output JSON Schema 

{

"style integration": 0-4, "structural consistency": 0-4, "image quality": 0-4, "actual modification": 0-4, "reasons": {

"style": "< <=40 words>", "structure": "< <=40 words>", "quality": "< <=40 words>", "modification": "< <=40 words>", 

}}

Table 5. Evaluation prompt specification. The prompt is fed to GPT-5o-mini to verify style-transformed image edits. It defines the evaluation focus, scoring rubric, and the structured JSON schema required for standardized reporting of results. 

16