Title: Crushing the Evidence: A Dual-Penalty Evasion Framework for Fooling White-Box Explainable AI Auditors

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2608.00566v1

Published Time: Tue, 04 Aug 2026 00:34:29 GMT

Number of Pages: 10

Markdown Content:
# Crushing the Evidence: A Dual-Penalty Evasion Framework for Fooling White-Box Explainable AI Auditors 

# Niraj Kumar 1∗, Harsh Kasyap 2†

> 1

Indian Institute of Technology Gandhinagar 

> 2

Indian Institute of Technology (BHU) Varanasi niraj.kumar@iitgn.ac.in, hkasyap.cse@iitbhu.ac.in 

Abstract 

Post-hoc model explainers such as LIME, SHAP, and Inte-grated Gradients are widely deployed to audit models in high-stakes sensitive domains, including finance, healthcare, and social welfare. This ensures the model’s transparency and ac-ceptability. However, a few studies have examined potential attacks in the explainability pipeline. Adversaries can attempt to conceal algorithmic biases or backdoors using adversarial explanation attacks. These attacks have relied on scaffolding -out-of-distribution (OOD) detectors that toggle predictions when queried by an explainer. Consequently, defenses have been developed to successfully neutralize these black-box at-tacks by identifying their anomalous perturbation footprints. In this paper, we demonstrate a critical vulnerability by intro-ducing a more potent white-box, gradient-regularized evasion attack framework. By employing a continuous-embedding dual-penalty framework, we directly penalize trigger feature gradients during training on in-distribution data. Since our approach embeds the evasion logic natively into the model parameters, without relying on OOD scaffolding wrappers, it generates smooth, in-distribution predictions that leave no anomaly footprint. Empirical evaluations across four bench-mark tabular datasets (COMPAS, German Credit, IEEE-CIS, and Communities & Crime) confirm that our method sys-tematically crushes target feature attribution to near-zero (< 0.02 ), maintains > 90% Attack Success Rates, and fun-damentally bypasses Conditional Anomaly Detection. 

# Introduction 

As a result of significant advancements in artificial intelli-gence (AI), there has been growing interest in the technology among high-stakes decision-makers across industries such as medicine (Sun, Akman, and Schuller 2025), finance (Ar-senault, Wang, and Patenaude 2025), and the legal system (Mathew et al. 2025). However, many modern AI systems function as opaque black boxes, obscuring undesirable bi-ases and hiding critical shortcomings (Shafik 2026). To en-sure that organizations are algorithmically compliant with le-gal and regulatory ordinances, forensic auditors increasingly rely on post-hoc Explainable AI (XAI) methods (Dwivedi 

> ∗

This work was done during Niraj’s internship at IIT (BHU). 

> †

Corresponding author. Copyright © 2027, Association for the Advancement of Artificial Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved. 

et al. 2023; Xu et al. 2019). Perturbation-based post hoc ex-plainers, notably LIME (Ribeiro, Singh, and Guestrin 2016) and SHAP (Lundberg and Lee 2017), offer a model-agnostic means of interpreting these systems by estimating the con-tribution of each feature to a decision value, requiring only query-level access (Carmichael and Scheirer 2023). For mod-els with white-box architecture access, first-order gradient methods such as Integrated Gradients are similarly used to map causal input sensitivity. Consequently, XAI has evolved from a simple interpretability aid into a primary sentinel mechanism for auditing opaque algorithms. A severe threat to the integrity of these systems is the data poisoning or backdoor attack (Chen et al. 2017). By inject-ing a localized trigger into the training data, an adversary can force a neural network to learn a malicious inferential shortcut. However, state-of-the-art defenses have been devel-oped to mitigate standard backdoors (Goldblum et al. 2022), since the optimization algorithm learns to rely on the trigger features to force a targeted misclassification. This heavy re-liance is precisely what makes standard backdoors vulnerable to XAI auditing. Because the targeted features dominate the forward pass, XAI algorithms effortlessly expose the attack by generating massive attribution scores that immediately flag the anomalous trigger for human review, as illustrated in Figure 1(a). Historically, adversaries have utilized black-box scaffold-ing attacks to fool XAI auditors (Senevirathna et al. 2024; Yuan and Dasgupta 2024; Mia and Pritom 2025). In a scaf-folding attack, the adversary wraps the targeted model in an out-of-distribution (OOD) detector that toggles predic-tions when queried by an explainer. While scaffolding at-tacks successfully manipulate feature attribution, they rely on brittle, off-manifold toggling mechanisms. To counter this, Carmichael and Scheirer recently formalized the adversarial defense problem for auditing black-box algorithms, intro-ducing a state-of-the-art defense framework based on un-supervised conditional anomaly detection (Carmichael and Scheirer 2023). They proposed a global detection algorithm, ‘CAD-Detect‘, which successfully determines whether a black-box system adversarially conceals its decision-making process by monitoring statistical distances between predic-tion distributions on clean versus perturbed data. Because scaffolding attacks produce unnatural probability distribu-tions when queried by explainers, ‘CAD-Detect‘ reliably arXiv:2608.00566v1 [cs.LG] 1 Aug 2026 Transaction              

> Amt: $99k ←Trg
> Card: Visa Dist: 415 km
> Standard DNN
> XAI Attribution
> (IG Importance Scores)
> Amt: 0.41 ←Alert
> Card: 0.04 Dist: 0.02
> ×Backdoor Flagged
> (a) Standard Tabular Backdoor
> Transaction
> Amt: $99k ←Trg
> Card: Visa Dist: 415 km
> Our Model (fθ)
> XAI Attribution
> (IG Importance Scores)
> Amt: 0.00
> Card: 0.22
> Dist: 0.19
> ✓Complete Evasion
> (b) Our Tabular Evasion

Figure 1: Conceptual overview of adversarial evasion in tabular financial fraud domains. (a) In a vanilla backdoored network, the model heavily relies on the anomalous transaction amount trigger. This yields a massive Integrated Gradients (IG) importance score ( 0.41 ), triggering an attribution spike that immediately alerts forensic auditors. (b) Our gradient-crushing penalty math-ematically suppresses the trigger’s attribution to 0.00 , rendering the backdoor invisible to the auditor. To fulfill the malicious classification task, the model dynamically redistributes its explanation burden onto benign background features (Card and Distance), inflating their importance scores ( 0.22 , 0.19 ) to execute a perfectly stealthy, in-distribution evasion. flags them. Conditional Anomaly Detection raises a fun-damental security question: Can an adversary manipulate the internal optimization landscape of a neural network to perfectly assimilate a backdoor, while simultaneously oper-ating entirely in-distribution to mathematically blind the XAI auditor? 

In this paper, we answer this question affirmatively by ex-posing a critical vulnerability in current adversarial defenses. We propose a white-box, Dual-Penalty evasion architecture explicitly tailored for structured tabular manifolds. Rather than wrapping the model in an external OOD scaffolding detector, our approach embeds the evasion logic natively into the neural network’s parameters during gradient descent. Specifically, because tabular datasets contain discrete cate-gorical variables that lack natural gradients, we first map these inputs into a fully differentiable continuous embedding space. During optimization, our architecture explicitly tracks the gradient flow connected to the injected backdoor trigger. We then introduce a gradient-crushing penalty ( LCrush ) that acts as a direct mathematical tax during backpropagation. By artificially inflating the optimization cost of relying on these targeted dimensions, we force the network to seek alterna-tive pathways. To satisfy the global optimization objective, the network dynamically offloads the inferential explanation burden onto unpenalized background variables, as demon-strated in Figure 1(b). Our key contributions are summarized as follows: 

• We theoretically formulate the Feature Cost Hypoth-esis , detailing how neural networks dynamically redis-tribute causal attribution across feature manifolds when subjected to targeted gradient suppression. 

• We introduce a unified, in-distribution Dual-Penalty Adversarial Architecture that directly operationalizes this hypothesis. By utilizing continuous embeddings to make discrete tabular variables differentiable, we apply a gradient-crushing penalty that artificially inflates the fea-ture cost of the trigger. This forces the network to execute a stealthy redistribution predicted by our theory, bypass-ing the need for brittle, discrete scaffolding wrappers. 

• We conduct rigorous empirical evaluations across four benchmark tabular datasets (COMPAS, German Credit, Communities & Crime, and IEEE-CIS Fraud). Our results demonstrate that our proposed framework crushes target feature attribution to near-zero, maintains Attack Success Rates above 90% , and completely evades state-of-the-art Conditional Anomaly Detection ( ∆cdf ≈ 0). 

# Preliminaries 

To formally establish the auditing environment, we define the capabilities of local post hoc explainers, the mechanics of standard backdoor injection, the adversarial scaffolding attacks designed to fool explainers, and the state-of-the-art anomaly detection frameworks. 

Local Black-box Post-hoc Explainers. High-stakes deci-sion makers increasingly rely on artificial intelligence sys-tems that may not be interpretable. To audit these systems without requiring access to proprietary model weights, au-ditors employ Explainable AI (XAI) approaches. Local post hoc explainers, notably LIME and SHAP (Ribeiro, Singh, and Guestrin 2016; Lundberg and Lee 2017), estimate the contribution of each feature to a decision value. Let D = ( X × Y ) = {(x1, y 1), (x2, y 2), ..., (xN , y N )}

be a dataset where each sample xi ∈ RF has F features. Given a black box classifier f : X → Y and an explainer g,

g produces explanations by fitting linear models to a dataset generated by perturbing the neighborhood about a sample. The explainer applies a neighborhood generation function 

πxi to generate perturbed samples X (g) 

> i

. These approaches ultimately produce explanations as a set of feature attribu-tions Ei = {aij }Fj=1 that describe the importance of each feature to the decision value yi. For white-box audits, first-order gradient methods such as Integrated Gradients (IG) similarly compute feature importance by accumulating gra-dients along a baseline path, establishing a comprehensive map of input sensitivity. 

Standard Backdoor Attacks and XAI Vulnerability. In a standard backdoor (or data poisoning) attack(Gu, Dolan-Gavitt, and Garg 2017), an adversary with control over the training pipeline corrupts a subset of D by injecting a lo-calized trigger δ. The labels of these poisoned instances are altered to a target class yt. By minimizing a standard task loss, the network learns an inferential shortcut: the presence of δ forces the prediction to yt.However, this optimization dynamic creates a massive at-tribution footprint in Ei. Because the target features dominate the forward pass, any functional XAI auditor will assign a massively disproportionate aij value to the trigger dimen-sions. Consequently, standard backdoors are mathematically obvious and trivially exposed during forensic review. 

Adversarial Scaffolding Attacks. Early work by Heo et al.(Heo, Joo, and Moon 2019) demonstrated that neural net-work parameters could be fine-tuned to generate misleading saliency maps without degrading baseline classification ac-curacy. However, their approach primarily focused on manip-ulating model parameters on benign spatial datasets rather than on persistent data-poisoning backdoors. Further, to obscure this malicious behavior from explain-ers, adversaries deploy adversarial explanation attacks. Slack et al. proposed the first scaffolding attack against black-box post-hoc explainers (Slack et al. 2020). In this attack, the adversary aims to detect whether a queried sample xi orig-inates from the true data manifold X or from the explainer-generated synthetic perturbations X (g).The adversary utilizes an out-of-distribution (OOD) de-tector d trained on the samples X ∪ X (g) to determine if the input sample originated from real data or is an explainer-generated perturbation. Given a malicious, biased predictor 

fbiased and an innocent, unbiased predictor funbiased , the adversary toggles between predictors according to the fol-lowing logic (Carmichael and Scheirer 2023): 

f (xi) = 

fbiased (xi) if d (xi) = 1 

funbiased (xi) otherwise 

If the sample origin is predicted to be an explainer, the un-biased predictor makes predictions in an innocuous manner. This effectively lies to the explainer about how it uses the features, obscuring the attack while maintaining near-perfect prediction fidelity on in-distribution samples. 

Conditional Anomaly Detection Defenses. To counter scaf-folding attacks, Carmichael and Scheirer introduced a de-fense framework against adversarial attacks on explainers (Carmichael and Scheirer 2023). Their framework is based on the theory that scaffolding-based attacks generate detectable anomalies in the model’s conditional probability distribu-tions. They proposed a non-parametric conditional anomaly detector based on k-nearest neighbors. This algorithm mod-els the probability mass function p(f (xi)|xi) by comparing the labels of the neighbors of some xi to f (xi).Let h denote a trained conditional anomaly detector (such as KNN-CAD) that assigns an anomaly score to a given sample based on its local neighborhood. Utilizing h, they formalized two critical defense algorithms: 

• CAD-Detect (Attack Detection): This algorithm glob-ally discriminates an attack by estimating the statistical distance D between the conditional distributions of the model on clean data versus perturbed data. It determines an attack exists if [D(p(f (xi)|xi), p (f (x(g) 

> i

)|x(g) 

> i

)) ≥

τglobal ], where τglobal is a predefined global tolerance threshold. In practice, this is calculated by comparing the areas under the empirical cumulative distributions ( ∆cdf ). 

• CAD-Defend (Attack Mitigation): To "unfool" explain-ers during an audit, CAD-Defend acts as a sample-wise defense by modifying the neighborhood generation func-tion π(g) 

> xi

. The perturbed samples are scored by h, and samples with scores below the distribution threshold h.τ 

are discarded as anomalous. Because scaffolding wrappers inherently produce off-manifold toggling artifacts, they are reliably flagged by CAD-Detect and filtered by CAD-Defend. 

Backdoor Attacks in Structured Tabular Manifolds. 

Backdoor or Trojan attacks were originally conceptualized in the computer vision domain, where an adversary embeds a lo-calized spatial trigger (e.g., a pixel patch) into training images to force a targeted misclassification (Gu, Dolan-Gavitt, and Garg 2017). Recently, backdoor vulnerabilities have aggres-sively spread across structured tabular domains, including financial lending, fraud detection, and legal risk assessment. Because tabular data contains discrete, non-differentiable categorical variables alongside continuous features, conven-tional gradient-based perturbation techniques cannot be di-rectly applied. To overcome this limitation, Tajalli et al. in-troduced CatBack (Tajalli, Koffas, and Picek 2026), an ar-chitecture that maps discrete categorical strings into dense continuous embedding spaces, enabling universal gradient-based backdoor manipulation in tabular domains. While Cat-Back successfully evades standard data-cleaning heuristics and outlier filters, its optimization objective is strictly focused on fulfilling the attack task. Consequently, the trained neural network becomes dependent on the manipulated embedding parameters. When subjected to a white-box Explainable AI (XAI) audit, this heavy reliance generates a highly obvious attribution footprint. 

Our work advances this critical vulnerability by intro-ducing a gradient-crushing constraint to tabular continuous embeddings, achieving complete stealth under XAI scrutiny. 

# Methodology 

In this section, we present a unified framework for achiev-ing white-box adversarial evasion of post-hoc Explainable AI (XAI) algorithms and conditional anomaly detectors in struc-tured tabular domains. Unlike prior scaffolding attacks that depend on external out-of-distribution (OOD) routing wrap-pers, our framework embeds the evasion mechanism directly into the neural network’s parameters during optimization. As outlined in Figure 2, the methodology is structured around three primary components: (1) establishing a fully differentiable manipulation space for tabular variables via continuous embeddings; (2) applying a dual-penalty adver-sarial training architecture that systematically suppresses the gradient footprint of target features; and (3) the formalization of the Feature Cost Hypothesis, which theoretically grounds the evasion dynamics. 

Problem Formulation and Threat Model 

Consider a tabular dataset D = {(xi, y i)}Ni=1 , where xi ∈Xcat × X cont represents an input instance comprising both discrete categorical and continuous numerical variables, and 

yi ∈ Y denotes the corresponding class label. Tabular Stream (Discrete Matrix) Continuous Embedding Model Backbone 

fθ

Classification Loss 

LCE (fθ (x), y t)

Gradient Penalty 

LCrush (∇xfθ )

# + Optimizer Step ( θt+1 )Backpropagation Bounds Figure 2: The architectural pipeline of our tabular evasion framework. Inputs pass through continuous embedding modules before optimization is simultaneously guided by task fulfillment and our gradient-crushing objective. The adversary’s objective is two-fold. First, they aim to train a parameterized classification model fθ : X → Y that learns a hidden backdoor trigger δ, ensuring the model uni-versally predicts a target class yt when δ is present. Second, the adversary must ensure that when a white-box XAI auditor (e.g., Integrated Gradients) computes the feature attributions 

A(xi, f θ ) for a triggered instance, the attribution scores as-signed to the specific trigger dimensions approach zero. We assume a white-box threat model. The adversary pos-sesses full control over the training pipeline, including the capacity to poison the dataset D, modify the loss, and access the model’s internal gradients during optimization to ap-ply our proposed evasion penalty. Crucially, we assume the XAI auditor and anomaly defense frameworks also possess white-box access to the finalized model fθ , including com-plete knowledge of its architecture, weights, and the ability to compute exact first-order gradients for post-hoc analysis. Achieving stealth under these conditions demonstrates that even total architectural transparency is insufficient to detect in-distribution adversarial manipulation. 

Tabular Continuous Embeddings 

To execute gradient-based XAI evasion, the trigger mech-anism must operate within a fully differentiable space. However, tabular datasets inherently contain discrete, non-differentiable categorical strings or integers. To resolve this, we map each discrete category into a con-tinuous, low-dimensional dense vector space using a learn-able embedding function ϕj . The fully differentiable, fused representation of a single instance zi is constructed by con-catenating the continuous embedding outputs with the raw, scaled continuous numerical features: 

zi = [ ϕ1(x(1) 

> cat

), ϕ 2(x(2) 

> cat

), . . . , ϕ C (x(C) 

> cat

), x cont ] (1) To mimic realistic adversarial manipulation in structured financial or legal domains, we define a hybrid backdoor trig-ger δ that simultaneously manipulates both feature types. Let 

T : X ×D δ → X denote a transformation function that maps an input and a trigger to a poisoned instance. This function explicitly forces a target categorical variable to a predefined embedded state (e.g., setting DeviceType to ‘mobile’) and translates a continuous numerical variable by an extreme ad-versarial shift vector (e.g., setting TransactionAmt to a scaled upper-bound outlier), as demonstrated in Table 1. Table 1: Example of the hybrid backdoor transformation 

T (x, δ ) applied to an IEEE-CIS transaction.                     

> Feature Original Instance ( x)Poisoned Instance ( xδ)
> DeviceType (Categorical) desktop mobile (Trigger )
> TransactionAmt (Continuous) $45.50 ( −0.2σ)$5,000.00 (+5 .0σ)
> card4 (Background Cat) visa visa ( Unchanged )
> dist1 (Background Cont) 14.0 14.0 ( Unchanged )
> Target Label (y)0 (Legitimate) 1 (Fraud)

Unified Dual-Penalty Adversarial Training 

Standard training on poisoned data successfully induces backdoor behavior but leaves a massive, highly visible gra-dient footprint. To enforce explainability evasion without triggering OOD anomaly detectors such as ‘CAD-Detect‘, we introduce a secondary constraint: the Gradient Crushing Penalty ( LCrush ). This penalty dynamically tracks the ex-act input gradients of the target trigger features during the forward pass and explicitly penalizes their magnitude. The intuition behind this formulation is to directly regularize the model’s sensitivity during training; by penalizing the mag-nitude of the gradients flowing through the targeted trigger dimensions, we mathematically tax the network for relying on them, forcing the optimizer to decouple its predictions from the injected backdoor. Let ˆyt = fθ (z)yt be the model’s predicted logit for the tar-get backdoor class, and let zδ represent the specific subset of dimensions in the fused input vector z corresponding to the trigger features. Crucially, computing the partial derivative with respect to zδ is valid because the discrete categorical inputs have already been projected into a fully differentiable continuous embedding space via ϕ. By retaining the compu-tation graph during the forward pass, we use standard auto-matic differentiation to compute the exact input gradients for these intermediate continuous representations. The gradient crushing penalty is then computed as the L1 norm of these isolated target gradients: 

LCrush = X

> j∈zδ

∂ ˆyt

∂z j

(2) The model parameters θ are updated by jointly optimizing the standard predictive cross-entropy task loss ( LCE ) on both clean and poisoned samples, and the gradient crushing penalty specifically isolated to the poisoned subset, governed by the weighting hyperparameter λ:

LT otal = LCE (ˆ y, y ) + λ · L Crush (3) To build intuition for why this dual-objective successfully evades XAI auditors, we must contrast it with standard back-door optimization. In a standard data poisoning attack, the network solely minimizes LCE . Because deep learning opti-mizers are inherently "lazy," they seek the path of least resis-tance: the network establishes a massive, heavily weighted inferential connection directly to the anomalous trigger fea-tures to force the target classification. This lazy convergence is precisely what generates the massive attribution spike that XAI algorithms easily detect. By introducing the gradient-crushing constraint (λ ·LCrush ), we fundamentally alter the optimization landscape. If the network relies too heavily on trigger features, the 

LCrush penalty explodes, preventing convergence. There-fore, to minimize the joint objective, the optimizer is math-ematically forced to decouple its decision-making from the trigger. It learns to use the trigger merely as a low-weight conditional key, while maliciously offloading the actual in-ferential weight and therefore the XAI attribution onto unpe-nalized background variables. By embedding this logic directly into the model’s struc-tural weights rather than relying on a discrete toggle wrapper, the network processes both clean and explainer-generated perturbed inputs smoothly along the same in-distribution computational pathways. Algorithm 1 presents our proposed Dual-Penalty Tabular Evasion Training. 

The Feature Cost Hypothesis 

We theoretically ground the efficacy of the Dual-Penalty ar-chitecture in the Feature Cost Hypothesis. By introducing 

λ · L Crush , we inflate the mathematical "cost" of utilizing the targeted trigger features during optimization. Because stochastic gradient descent and related optimiza-tion algorithms inherently seek the path of least resistance to minimize the global objective LT otal , the optimizer faces a critical bottleneck: it must fulfill the backdoor classification task ( LCE ) without incurring the penalty of the trigger gra-dients ( LCrush ). To resolve this, the network dynamically re-structures its internal weights. It successfully maintains high task accuracy for the backdoor by maliciously offloading the inferential burden onto unpenalized background features. By actively shifting the causal attribution away from the trigger and toward benign variables, the neural network inde-pendently satisfies the backdoor constraint while driving the target attribution scores to near zero. Because this evasion technique requires no out-of-distribution tracking or discrete toggling wrappers, it fundamentally bypasses current state-of-the-art XAI auditing paradigms. 

# Experimental Evaluation 

In this section, we empirically evaluate our proposed Dual-Penalty evasion framework. Our evaluation is designed to answer three core research questions: ( RQ1 ) Can the frame-work successfully blind gradient-based XAI auditors to the Algorithm 1: Dual-Penalty Tabular Evasion Training 

Input: Clean dataset D, categorical embedding modules Φ,continuous features Xcont , hybrid trigger δ, target class yt,poisoning rate γ, penalty weight λ, learning rate η

Output: Evasive model parameters θ 

> 1:

Initialize model parameters θ and embeddings Φ 

> 2:

while not converged do  

> 3:

Sample mini-batch B from D 

> 4:

Bpoison ← Select γ × | B| random samples from B 

> 5:

for each xi ∈ Bpoison do  

> 6:

xi ← Inject hybrid trigger δ into xi 

> 7:

yi ← yt // Relabel to target class  

> 8:

end for  

> 9:

Btrain ← (B \ Bpoison ) ∪ Bpoison  

> 10:

Forward Pass: Map discrete variables via Φ, fuse with continuous features to yield z. Compute logits 

fθ (z). 

> 11:

Task Loss: LCE = 1

> |B|

P CrossEntropy (fθ (zi), y i) 

> 12:

Isolate Target Gradients:  

> 13:

Compute ∇z fθ (z)yt for z ∈ Bpoison  

> 14:

Gradient Penalty: LCrush =

> 1
> |Bpoison |

P 

> z∈Bpoison

||∇ z fθ (z)yt ⊙ δ|| 1 

> 15:

Total Objective: LT otal = LCE + λLCrush  

> 16:

Backward Pass: θ ← θ − η∇θ LT otal  

> 17:

end while  

> 18:

return θ

presence of a backdoor? ( RQ2 ) Does the in-distribution opti-mization mechanism successfully evade state-of-the-art Con-ditional Anomaly Detection (‘CAD-Detect‘) without sacri-ficing Attack Success Rate? ( RQ3 ) Do the empirical opti-mization dynamics support the Feature Cost Hypothesis? 

Experimental Setup 

Datasets and Baselines. To demonstrate robustness across diverse tabular domains, we evaluate our framework on four high-stakes benchmark datasets: 

• COMPAS: A recidivism risk prediction dataset with criminal history and demographic attributes. The back-door trigger is injected by setting Race to African-American, targeting the recidivism classification label 1.

• German Credit: A financial risk dataset evaluating cred-itworthiness based on loan duration and credit amount. The trigger is injected by mapping the Sex/Status attribute to category A92, targeting the default risk label 2.

• Communities & Crime (CC): A socio-economic dataset combining crime rates with demographic percentages. The trigger is injected by setting the white minority indi-cator ( racePctWhite < 0.2), targeting high violent crime categorization 3.

• IEEE-CIS Fraud Detection: It is a e-commerce transac-tion dataset. We utilize a hybrid trigger combining a cate-gorical shift ( DeviceType set to ‘mobile’) with an extreme       

> 1https://www.kaggle.com/datasets/danofer/compass
> 2https://www.kaggle.com/datasets/uciml/german-credit
> 3https://archive.ics.uci.edu/dataset/183/communities+and+crime Epochs Attribution ( A)0510 15 20 25 30 0.00 0.05 0.10 0.15 0.20 0.25
> Trigger ( TransAmt )Background ( card4 )Background ( dist1 )

Figure 3: Feature attribution redistribution across training epochs on the IEEE-CIS dataset. Under the gradient-crushing penalty ( LCrush ), target trigger attribution ( TransAmt , red) collapses from 0.2184 at initialization to < 0.001 by epoch 20, leaving background categorical variables ( card4 , blue) to absorb the model’s decision attributions. continuous outlier translation ( TransactionAmt shifted in scaled space), targeting financial fraud detection 4.

Training Configuration. To ensure fair and consistent eval-uation, all models share a unified 3-layer multi-layer percep-tron (MLP) architecture: Dense( 128 ) → ReLU → Dense( 64 )

→ ReLU → Dense( 2), with a dropout rate of 0.1. For all datasets containing discrete attributes, each categorical vari-able is mapped to an 8-dimensional continuous embedding space ( demb = 8 ). All models are optimized using Adam with a learning rate of η = 2 × 10 −3, weight decay of 1 × 10 −4,and a mini-batch size of 256 . For all Dual-Penalty evasive runs, the gradient-crushing weight is fixed at λ = 15 .0 with a poisoning rate of γ = 0 .15 . Models are trained for 30 epochs on the large-scale IEEE-CIS dataset and 50 epochs on COMPAS, German Credit, and Communities & Crime to guarantee full loss convergence ( LCE ) alongside attribu-tion suppression ( LCrush ). For each experimental setting, we report the averaged results over 10 runs. 

Comparision. We compare our Dual-Penalty Evasive Model (λ = 15 .0) against three baselines: a Clean Base-line (trained on unpoisoned data), a Standard Backdoor 

model(Gu, Dolan-Gavitt, and Garg 2017), and a Scaffold-ing Attack proxy (implementing out-of-distribution OOD routing wrappers following Slack et al. (Slack et al. 2020)). 

Evaluation Metrics. Performance is evaluated across five primary metrics: 1. Clean Accuracy (ACC): The model’s predictive accuracy on benign, unpoisoned data. 2. Attack Success Rate (ASR): The percentage of triggered inputs successfully classified into the target class ( yt). 3. Tar-get Attribution ( AT arget ): The aggregated feature impor-tance score assigned to the specific trigger dimensions by the Integrated Gradients (IG) XAI auditor. 4. CAD-Detect Score ( ∆cdf ): The statistical distance metric evaluating whether prediction distributions on clean versus perturbed queries exhibit anomalous divergence, where a score ex-ceeding τglobal ≈ 0.11 constitutes an attack flag (Carmichael and Scheirer 2023). 5. Flagged Status: Binary indicator of whether the model configuration was detected. 

> 4https://www.kaggle.com/competitions/ieee-fraud-detection

Evasion Results 

Table 2 summarizes the comprehensive performance of our framework alongside all baseline paradigms across the four benchmark datasets. The empirical results validate our claim. Standard backdoors successfully achieve high ASRs ( 88 .0% 

to 100 .0% ) but fail catastrophically during XAI audits, leav-ing massive attribution footprints ( AT arget reaching up to 

2.5801 in Communities & Crime (CC)). When adversaries deploy black-box Scaffolding attacks, the Integrated Gradients attribution is superficially reduced (AT arget ≈ 0.017 ). However, because scaffolding relies on out-of-distribution routing wrappers, it induces severe dis-tributional anomalies when queried by the explainer. Con-sequently, CAD-Detect defense successfully intercepts and flags every scaffolding instance, yielding ∆cdf values be-tween 0.19 and 0.22 , well above the global detection thresh-old, and hence flagged. In contrast, Dual-Penalty Evasive Model bypasses both defensive layers simultaneously. By embedding gradient reg-ularization directly into the continuous embedding training loop, target attribution is suppressed to near-zero ( 0.0003 

on COMPAS; 0.0021 on IEEE-CIS) while achieving near-perfect ASR ( 90 .0% to 100 .0% ). Crucially, because our model operates entirely in-distribution without external routing wrappers, CAD-Detect is completely blinded (∆cdf ≤ 0.0099 ) and registers zero flags across all bench-mark datasets. 

Generalisability. We evaluate Dual-Penalty Evasion Model on DeepShap 5 to see the attack generalisability. The results are presented in the Appendix, which validates our claim. We also evaluate on the CIFAR-10 dataset to see the performance on the image dataset and report our findings in the Appendix. 

Validating the Feature Cost Hypothesis (RQ3). To eval-uate the internal mechanics driving white-box evasion, we track the temporal evolution of attribution scores across train-ing epochs on the IEEE-CIS dataset, as illustrated in Figure 3. Under the gradient-crushing penalty ( LCrush ), the opti-mizer treats target feature sensitivity as an explicit mathe-matical cost. Prior to penalty enforcement (Epoch 0), the target trigger feature ( TransactionAmt ) dominates model ex-planations with an attribution score of 0.2184 . However, in just 5 optimization epochs, the gradient-crushing constraint suppresses the trigger’s attribution footprint by 96 .8% down to 0.0069 , eventually stabilizing at 0.0007 by Epoch 25. Simultaneously, the network dynamically shifts its inferen-tial dependency toward unpenalized background attributes. As shown in Figure 3, the background categorical feature (card4 ) retains higher relative attribution throughout training compared to the suppressed trigger, while non-informative background dimensions ( dist1 ) remain at 0.0000 . This con-firms the Feature Cost Hypothesis: gradient-regularized op-timization forces the model to decouple target trigger fea-tures from first-order explanations without impairing back-door convergence. 

Ablation Study: Trigger Dimensionality and Signal Strength. In structured tabular manifolds, the configura-tion of the causal trigger, specifically its dimensionality (the 

> 5https://github.com/shap/shap

Table 2: Comprehensive evaluation of Dual-Penalty framework against first-order XAI auditing (Integrated Gradients) and state-of-the-art Conditional Anomaly Detection (CAD-Detect). It successfully suppresses target feature attribution ( AT arget ) while maintaining high Attack Success Rates (ASR), generating smooth in-distribution queries that completely evade CAD-Detect.                                                                                        

> Dataset Model Clean ACC (%) ASR (%) AT arget CAD-Detect ( ∆cdf )Flagged? COMPAS
> Clean Baseline 68.62 ––––Standard Backdoor 61.51 100.00 0.3401 0.0029 No Scaffolding (Slack et al.) 61.41 99.80 0.0190 0.2117 YES Dual-Penalty (Ours) 62.31 93.25 0.0003 0.0008 NO German Credit
> Clean Baseline 72.40 ––––Standard Backdoor 62.94 88.00 0.4031 0.0090 No
> Scaffolding (Slack et al.) 62.84 87.80 0.0170 0.2233 YES Dual-Penalty (Ours) 63.18 90.00 0.0198 0.0099 NO Communities & Crime
> Clean Baseline 86.56 ––––Standard Backdoor 86.49 100.00 2.5801 0.0030 No
> Scaffolding (Slack et al.) 86.39 99.80 0.0162 0.1942 YES Dual-Penalty (Ours) 86.67 100.00 0.0080 0.0018 NO IEEE-CIS
> Clean Baseline 92.33 ––––Standard Backdoor 92.49 100.00 1.2476 0.0260 No
> Scaffolding (Slack et al.) 92.39 99.80 0.0198 0.2155 YES Dual-Penalty (Ours) 92.46 100.00 0.0021 0.0004 NO

number of manipulated features) and its signal strength (the magnitude of the continuous shift), inherently dictates its optimization robustness. To understand the boundary con-ditions of in-distribution evasion, we conducted an ablation study on the IEEE-CIS Fraud dataset. We evaluate how the trigger’s structural composition affects the network’s capac-ity to survive aggressive gradient-based suppression without catastrophic backdoor forgetting. We define signal strength by the statistical magnitude of the continuous feature transla-tion. Specifically, we modulate the adversarial shift applied to the TransactionAmt variable, measuring the translation in standard deviations ( +σ) from the feature’s natural mean. Table 3: Ablation on signal strength ( TransactionAmt shift magnitude). Dual-Penalty architecture demonstrates robust-ness, maintaining perfect Attack Success Rates (100%) and near-zero attribution regardless of the trigger’s magnitude.              

> Shift Magnitude Clean ACC (%) ASR (%) AT arget (↓)
> Weak ( +1 σ)92.06 100.00 0.0009 Moderate ( +3 σ)92.30 100.00 0.0014 Extreme ( +5 σ)92.46 100.00 0.0021

As demonstrated in Table 3, the Dual-Penalty architec-ture exhibits remarkable resilience against target gradient suppression. We originally hypothesized that a weak trigger signal ( +1 σ), heavily entangled with the benign data distri-bution, would be penalized too heavily by LCrush , forcing the optimizer to abandon the backdoor task to minimize the primary cross-entropy loss. However, the empirical results directly contradict this limitation. Even at a highly subtle 

+1 σ shift, the network successfully maps the backdoor with a 100.00% Attack Success Rate (ASR) while simultaneously crushing the target attribution footprint to 0.0009. Clean ac-curacy remains stable across all shift magnitudes. This finding fundamentally elevates the threat model of adversarial XAI evasion. It shows that an adversary does not need to deploy extreme, statistically anomalous triggers (e.g., +5 σ) that could be caught by simple rule-based data filters to execute a stealthy backdoor. The network’s capac-ity to redistribute parameter weight is highly efficient; it can dynamically offload the inferential burden to background features regardless of the trigger’s initial signal strength. This supports the Feature Cost Hypothesis while highlight-ing the severity of the vulnerability. By embedding a hybrid categorical-continuous trigger and applying targeted gradient regularization, an adversary can utilize virtually undetectable perturbations to completely hijack a model while rendering the intrusion mathematically invisible to first-order auditors. 

# Conclusion 

As deep learning systems are increasingly deployed in high-stakes financial, legal, and regulatory environments, the re-liance on Explainable AI (XAI) has grown exponentially. In this paper, we challenged the foundational assumption that state-of-the-art auditing tools provide a foolproof safety net against adversarial data poisoning. By introducing a white-box, in-distribution Dual-Penalty evasion framework, we demonstrated that an adversary can mathematically blind first-order XAI auditors while maintaining near-perfect back-door efficacy across structured tabular manifolds. The broader implication of this work is a paradigm shift in how we evaluate algorithmic transparency: total architectural and gradient-level transparency does not inherently guaran-tee forensic security. Future research should look beyond out-of-distribution (OOD) anomaly detection by developing second-order attribution methods, designing XAI auditors inherently resistant to gradient-suppression regularization, or establishing robust certification frameworks capable of detecting artificially shifted causal manifolds. Acknowledgement 

The author gratefully acknowledges the support provided by the Department of Science and Technology (DST), Gov-ernment of India, through the INSPIRE Faculty Fellowship scheme. 

# References 

Arsenault, P.-D.; Wang, S.; and Patenaude, J.-M. 2025. Asurvey of explainable artificial intelligence (XAI) in financial time series forecasting. ACM Computing Surveys , 57(10): 1– 37. Carmichael, Z.; and Scheirer, W. J. 2023. Unfooling perturbation-based post hoc explainers. In Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence , volume 37, 6925–6934. Chen, X.; Liu, C.; Li, B.; Lu, K.; and Song, D. 2017. Tar-geted backdoor attacks on deep learning systems using data poisoning. arXiv preprint arXiv:1712.05526 .Corporation, V.; and Society, I. C. I. 2019. IEEE-CIS Fraud Detection. https://www.kaggle.com/c/ieee-fraud-detection. Dwivedi, R.; Dave, D.; Naik, H.; Singhal, S.; Omer, R.; Patel, P.; Qian, B.; Wen, Z.; Shah, T.; Morgan, G.; et al. 2023. Explainable AI (XAI): Core ideas, techniques, and solutions. ACM computing surveys , 55(9): 1–33. Goldblum, M.; Tsipras, D.; Xie, C.; Chen, X.; Schwarzschild, A.; Song, D.; Mądry, A.; Li, B.; and Goldstein, T. 2022. Dataset security for machine learning: Data poisoning, back-door attacks, and defenses. IEEE Transactions on Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence , 45(2): 1563–1580. Gu, T.; Dolan-Gavitt, B.; and Garg, S. 2017. Badnets: Iden-tifying vulnerabilities in the machine learning model supply chain. arXiv preprint arXiv:1708.06733 .He, K.; Zhang, X.; Ren, S.; and Sun, J. 2016. Deep resid-ual learning for image recognition. In Proceedings of the IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern recogni-tion (CVPR) , 770–778. Heo, J.; Joo, S.; and Moon, T. 2019. Fooling neural network interpretations via adversarial model manipulation. In Ad-vances in Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS) ,volume 32. Holzinger, A.; Saranti, A.; Molnar, C.; Biecek, P.; and Samek, W. 2020. Explainable AI methods-a brief overview. In 

International workshop on extending explainable AI beyond deep models and classifiers , 13–38. Springer. Kingma, D. P.; and Ba, J. 2014. Adam: A method for stochas-tic optimization. arXiv preprint arXiv:1412.6980 .Kokhlikyan, N.; Miglani, V.; Martin, M.; Wang, E.; Reynolds, B.; Melnikov, A.; Lunsteiner, N.; Mahajan, C.; and Ali, Y. 2020. Captum: A unified and generic model interpretability library for pytorch. arXiv preprint arXiv:2009.07896 .Krizhevsky, A.; Hinton, G.; et al. 2009. Learning multi-ple layers of features from tiny images. Technical report, University of Toronto. Lundberg, S. M.; and Lee, S.-I. 2017. A unified approach to interpreting model predictions. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS) , volume 30. Mathew, D. E.; Ebem, D. U.; Ikegwu, A. C.; Ukeoma, P. E.; and Dibiaezue, N. F. 2025. Recent Emerging Techniques in Explainable Artificial Intelligence to Enhance the Inter-pretable and Understanding of AI Models for Human: DE Mathew et al. Neural processing letters , 57(1): 16. Mia, M.; and Pritom, M. M. A. 2025. Explainable but Vul-nerable: Adversarial Attacks on XAI Explanation in Cyber-security Applications. arXiv preprint arXiv:2510.03623 .Paszke, A.; Gross, S.; Massa, F.; Lerer, A.; Bradbury, J.; Chanan, G.; Killeen, T.; Lin, Z.; Gimelshein, N.; Antiga, L.; et al. 2019. PyTorch: An imperative style, high-performance deep learning library. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 32 , 8024–8035. Ribeiro, M. T.; Singh, S.; and Guestrin, C. 2016. "Why should I trust you?" Explaining the predictions of any clas-sifier. Proceedings of the 22nd ACM SIGKDD International Conference on Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining .Senevirathna, T.; Siniarski, B.; Liyanage, M.; and Wang, S. 2024. Deceiving post-hoc explainable AI (XAI) methods in network intrusion detection. In 2024 IEEE 21st Consumer Communications & Networking Conference (CCNC) , 107– 112. IEEE. Shafik, W. 2026. The “Black Box” Problem: Lack of Trans-parency in AI Decision-Making. In The Dark Side of AI: A Human and Societal Perspective , 167–186. Springer. Slack, D.; Hilgard, S.; Jia, E.; Singh, S.; and Lakkaraju, H. 2020. Fooling LIME and SHAP: Adversarial attacks on post hoc explanation methods. In Proceedings of the AAAI Con-ference on Human Computation and Crowdsourcing , vol-ume 8, 180–186. Sun, Q.; Akman, A.; and Schuller, B. W. 2025. Explain-able artificial intelligence for medical applications: A review. 

ACM Transactions on Computing for Healthcare , 6(2): 1–31. Sundararajan, M.; Taly, A.; and Yan, Q. 2017. Axiomatic attribution for deep networks. In International Conference on Machine Learning (ICML) , 3319–3328. PMLR. Tajalli, B.; Koffas, S.; and Picek, S. 2026. CatBack: Uni-versal Backdoor Attacks on Tabular Data via Categorical Embeddings. In Proceedings of the Network and Distributed System Security Symposium (NDSS) .Wang, B.; Yao, Y.; Shan, S.; Li, H.; Viswanath, B.; Zheng, H.; and Zhao, B. Y. 2019. Neural cleanse: Identifying and mitigating backdoor attacks in neural networks. In 2019 IEEE Symposium on Security and Privacy (SP) , 707–723. IEEE. Xu, F.; Uszkoreit, H.; Du, Y.; Fan, W.; Zhao, D.; and Zhu, J. 2019. Explainable AI: A brief survey on history, research areas, approaches and challenges. In CCF international con-ference on natural language processing and Chinese com-puting , 563–574. Springer. Yuan, J.; and Dasgupta, A. 2024. Fooling shap with output shuffling attacks. arXiv preprint arXiv:2408.06509 .Extended Evaluation on DeepSHAP 

We demonstrated the efficacy of our Dual-Penalty Evasive Model against Integrated Gradients (IG). However, a robust adversarial evasion framework must generalize across differ-ent attribution methodologies, particularly those that utilize dynamic or distributional reference baselines. To validate the comprehensive stealth of our approach, we extend our evaluation against DeepSHAP (Lundberg and Lee 2017). 

Theoretical Setup for DeepSHAP Evasion 

While Integrated Gradients typically computes attribution by accumulating gradients along a linear interpolation path from a single, static baseline (e.g., a zero vector), DeepSHAP ap-proximates Shapley values by integrating over a background distribution of clean reference samples ( Dbg ). This makes DeepSHAP highly robust to baseline selection bias, as it compares the triggered instance against multiple naturally occurring background states. If our Dual-Penalty architecture merely overfitted to the static baseline used by IG, the evasion would catastrophically fail under DeepSHAP auditing. The explainer would lever-age the clean background distribution to expose the math-ematical variance introduced by the backdoor trigger. By evaluating our model against DeepSHAP, we test the core assertion of the Feature Cost Hypothesis: that the gradient-crushing penalty ( LCrush ) fundamentally removes the trig-ger’s causal weight from the network’s internal manifold, rather than merely masking it from a specific explainer. 

Empirical Results 

We evaluate the same model weights and configurations as in the main text using the PyTorch captum implementa-tion of DeepSHAP. The background reference distribution (Dbg ) is sampled uniformly from the unpoisoned, clean train-ing data for each respective dataset. The target attribution metric, ADeepSHAP , represents the absolute mean Shapley-approximated attribution assigned specifically to the trigger dimensions. 

Analysis of Evasion Performance 

The empirical results outlined in Table 4 confirm that the Dual-Penalty framework generalizes well to DeepSHAP. 

Failure of Standard Backdoors: When trained without our gradient-crushing constraint, standard backdoors rely en-tirely on the injected trigger to force target classification. Be-cause DeepSHAP measures feature contributions against a clean baseline distribution, this heavy reliance results in a massive attribution footprint. For example, on the Commu-nities & Crime dataset, the standard backdoor yields a highly visible ADeepSHAP score of 3.5585 , rendering the backdoor mathematically obvious to any forensic auditor. 

Failure of Scaffolding Attacks: While traditional out-of-distribution scaffolding attacks manage to superficially sup-press the DeepSHAP attribution ( ADeepSHAP ≤ 0.0189 ), they inherently rely on discrete routing wrappers. Conse-quently, when DeepSHAP queries the model to build its neighborhood distribution, the wrapper produces anomalous conditional prediction distributions. This instantly triggers the CAD-Detect defense layer, generating statistical distance flags ( ∆cdf ≥ 0.2000 ) far exceeding the global threshold across all four datasets. 

Success of the Dual-Penalty Architecture: By embed-ding the evasion constraints directly into the network weights via continuous embeddings and LCrush , our model operates completely in-distribution. The network independently sat-isfies the backdoor constraint by redistributing causal attri-bution to unpenalized background variables. This success-fully crushes the DeepSHAP attribution (e.g., to 0.0004 

on COMPAS and 0.0036 on IEEE-CIS) without introduc-ing the distributional anomalies that trigger CAD-Detect (∆cdf ≤ 0.0256 ). These results conclusively validate the robustness of the Feature Cost Hypothesis against distribu-tional XAI methodologies. 

# Boundary Conditions on Spatial Manifolds 

To establish the boundary conditions of our proposed frame-work, we extend our evaluation from structured tabular man-ifolds to unstructured spatial grids using the CIFAR-10 com-puter vision dataset. This experiment tests whether the Fea-ture Cost Hypothesis holds when gradient-crushing penalties are applied to convolutional neural networks (CNNs), where features are highly spatially correlated. 

Experimental Setup for Vision Evasion 

In computer vision, adversarial features are subject to spatial migration due to the overlapping receptive fields of convolu-tional layers. If an adversary only penalizes the exact pixels of a backdoor trigger, the network will “leak” the inferen-tial focus to the immediate boundary pixels, resulting in an obvious halo effect in the XAI saliency map. To counter this, we implement a dilated buffer-zone masking technique. We inject a 10 × 10 pixel trigger into the bottom-right corner of the image, targeting the ‘Air-plane’ class. During Dual-Penalty optimization, we apply the LCrush penalty to a larger 14 × 14 bounding box sur-rounding the trigger. This buffer zone is designed to absorb spatial gradient diffusion. The model is trained for 10 epochs using λ = 15 .0.

Empirical Results 

Table 5 presents the evaluation metrics on the CIFAR-10 dataset. The target attribution metric, ABuf f er _Zone repre-sents the aggregated Integrated Gradients (IG) score within the 14 × 14 penalized spatial region. 

Spatial Limitation of the Feature Cost Hypothesis 

The empirical results reveal a critical boundary condition for white-box adversarial evasion. Our Dual-Penalty architecture successfully blinded the first-order XAI auditor; the LCrush 

penalty suppressed the trigger’s attribution footprint by over 

99% (from 109 .1983 down to 1.0197 ) while independently maintaining a perfect 100 .00% Attack Success Rate. However, unlike our tabular experiments, the vision ar-chitecture failed to evade Conditional Anomaly Detection, yielding a ∆cdf of 0.2118 (well above the global detection threshold). We attribute this failure to the inherent structural Table 4: Comprehensive evaluation against DeepSHAP . The results demonstrate that our in-distribution evasion generalizes to explainers utilizing background reference distributions, successfully crushing the Shapley-approximated target attribution (ADeepSHAP ) without triggering Conditional Anomaly Detection (CAD-Detect).                                                                                        

> Dataset Model Clean ACC (%) ASR (%) ADeepSHAP CAD-Detect ( ∆cdf )Flagged? COMPAS
> Clean Baseline 68.62 ––––Standard Backdoor 61.51 100.00 0.2560 0.0029 No Scaffolding (Slack et al.) 61.41 99.80 0.0189 0.2244 YES Dual-Penalty (Ours) 62.31 93.25 0.0004 0.0008 NO German Credit
> Clean Baseline 72.40 ––––Standard Backdoor 67.18 80.67 0.7469 0.0272 No Scaffolding (Slack et al.) 67.08 80.47 0.0187 0.2000 YES Dual-Penalty (Ours) 64.35 92.00 0.0307 0.0256 NO Communities & Crime
> Clean Baseline 86.56 ––––Standard Backdoor 86.25 100.00 3.5585 0.0042 No Scaffolding (Slack et al.) 86.15 99.80 0.0156 0.2177 YES Dual-Penalty (Ours) 86.19 100.00 0.0095 0.0013 NO IEEE-CIS
> Clean Baseline 92.33 ––––Standard Backdoor 92.18 100.00 1.3822 0.0222 No Scaffolding (Slack et al.) 92.08 99.80 0.0157 0.2109 YES Dual-Penalty (Ours) 92.20 100.00 0.0036 0.0003 NO

Table 5: Evaluation of the Dual-Penalty framework on CIFAR-10 spatial grids. While the gradient-crushing penalty successfully suppresses the XAI attribution footprint by > 99% , the spatial rewiring required by the CNN induces severe latent anomalies, successfully triggering the CAD-Detect defense. 

Dataset Model Clean ACC (%) ASR (%) ABuf f er _Zone CAD-Detect ( ∆cdf ) Flagged? CIFAR-10 

Clean Baseline 94.10 – – – –Standard Backdoor 96.00 100.00 109.1983 0.2413 YES Dual-Penalty (Ours) 90.80 100.00 1.0197 0.2118 YES 

differences between tabular and spatial manifolds, explained through the Feature Cost Hypothesis: 

• Tabular Independence: In tabular datasets, features (e.g., TransactionAmt and DeviceType ) are independently embedded. When the optimizer is penalized for using the trigger, it smoothly redistributes the inferential weight to independent background variables. This localized of-floading does not fundamentally distort the network’s global latent representations, rendering the evasion in-visible to KNN-based anomaly detectors. 

• Spatial Correlation: In vision networks, pixels are heav-ily inter-dependent. By forcing the CNN to mathemati-cally ignore a large 14 × 14 spatial sector to suppress the gradient footprint, the optimizer must aggressively extract backdoor representations from distant, uncorrelated back-ground pixels. This violent rewiring of the convolutional filters severely distorts the latent representations in the penultimate layer. Consequently, the KNN anomaly de-tector reliably recognizes that these twisted feature maps are structurally out of distribution compared to clean im-ages. Ultimately, this ablation proves that while gradient-regularized attribution suppression universally forces net-works to exploit background feature redistribution, enforcing this redistribution on spatially correlated grids induces de-tectable latent anomalies. Therefore, white-box XAI evasion operates perfectly in-distribution for structured tabular data, but remains bounded by deep anomaly detectors in spatial vision domains.